S.  HRG.  109–933

OF 

THE 

A  MEMBER 

NOMINATIONS  OF  STEVEN  CHEALANDER  TO
NATIONAL
BE 
TRANSPORTATION 
AND 
CHARLES  DORKEY  III  TO  BE  A  MEMBER  OF 
THE  ADVISORY  BOARD  OF  THE 
SAINT
DEVELOPMENT
LAWRENCE 
CORPORATION

SEAWAY 

SAFETY 

BOARD 

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, 

SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION 

UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE  HUNDRED  NINTH  CONGRESS

SECOND  SESSION

DECEMBER  5,  2006

Printed  for  the  use  of  the  Committee  on  Commerce,  Science,  and  Transportation

(

34–711 PDF 

WASHINGTON  : 

2007

U.S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office

Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800

Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 5011 Sfmt 5011 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

SENATE  COMMITTEE  ON  COMMERCE,  SCIENCE,  AND  TRANSPORTATION

ONE  HUNDRED  NINTH  CONGRESS

SECOND  SESSION

TED  STEVENS,  Alaska,  Chairman 

JOHN  MCCAIN,  Arizona 
CONRAD  BURNS,  Montana 
TRENT  LOTT,  Mississippi 
KAY  BAILEY  HUTCHISON,  Texas 
OLYMPIA  J.  SNOWE,  Maine 
GORDON  H.  SMITH,  Oregon 
JOHN  ENSIGN,  Nevada 
GEORGE  ALLEN,  Virginia 
JOHN  E.  SUNUNU,  New  Hampshire 
JIM  DEMINT,  South  Carolina 
DAVID  VITTER,  Louisiana 

DANIEL  K.  INOUYE,  Hawaii,  Co-Chairman 
JOHN  D.  ROCKEFELLER  IV,  West  Virginia 
JOHN  F.  KERRY,  Massachusetts 
BYRON  L.  DORGAN,  North  Dakota 
BARBARA  BOXER,  California 
BILL  NELSON,  Florida 
MARIA  CANTWELL,  Washington 
FRANK  R.  LAUTENBERG,  New  Jersey 
E.  BENJAMIN  NELSON,  Nebraska 
MARK  PRYOR,  Arkansas 

LISA J.  SUTHERLAND,  Republican  Staff  Director 

CHRISTINE DRAGER KURTH,  Republican  Deputy  Staff  Director 

KENNETH R.  NAHIGIAN,  Republican  Chief  Counsel 

MARGARET L.  CUMMISKY,  Democratic  Staff  Director  and  Chief  Counsel 

SAMUEL E.  WHITEHORN,  Democratic  Deputy  Staff  Director  and  General  Counsel 

LILA HARPER HELMS,  Democratic  Policy  Director 

(II)

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

C O N T E N T S 

Hearing held on December 5, 2006 ........................................................................
Statement of Senator Inouye ..................................................................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
Statement of Senator Stevens ................................................................................

WITNESSES 

Chealander,  Steven  R.,  Nominee  to  be  a  Member  of  the  National  Transpor-
tation Safety Board ..............................................................................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
Biographical information .................................................................................
Dorkey  III,  Charles  E.,  Nominee  to  be  a  Member  of  the  Advisory  Board 
of the Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation ................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
Biographical information .................................................................................

APPENDIX 

Hutchison, Hon. Kay Bailey, U.S. Senator from Texas, prepared statement .....
Snowe, Hon. Olympia J., U.S. Senator from Maine, prepared statement ..........
Response  to  written  questions  submitted  by  Hon.  Hillary  Rodham  Clinton 
to Charles E. Dorkey III ......................................................................................

Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Daniel K. Inouye to: 

Steven R. Chealander .......................................................................................
Charles E. Dorkey III .......................................................................................

Page 
1
11
2
1

2
3
5

7
8
9

15
15

17

16
17

(III)

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

NOMINATIONS  OF  STEVEN  CHEALANDER  TO 
BE  A  MEMBER  OF  THE  NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION  SAFETY  BOARD  AND 
CHARLES  DORKEY  III  TO  BE  A  MEMBER  OF 
THE  ADVISORY  BOARD  OF  THE  SAINT
LAWRENCE 
DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION 

SEAWAY 

TUESDAY,  DECEMBER  5,  2006

COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION, 

The  Committee  met,  pursuant  to  notice,  at  10:10  a.m.  in  room 
SR–253,  Russell  Senate  Office  Building,  Hon.  Ted  Stevens,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding. 

U.S. SENATE, 

Washington, DC. 

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TED STEVENS,

U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA 

The  CHAIRMAN.  Good  morning.  Senator  Inouye  sent  word  he’s 
stuck  in  traffic  and  asked  us  to  proceed  with  the  hearing,  and  I’m 
delighted to have that clearance from him. 

This  probably  is  the  last  meeting  of  this  Committee  during  this 
Congress,  and  this  morning  we  will  hear  from  nominees  to  serve 
on  the  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  and  the  Saint  Law-
rence  Seaway  Development  Corporation.  We  welcome  you.  Other 
Members  are  all  represented  here  by  staff  and  they  welcome  your 
willingness to serve us at this time. 

Steven  Chealander  has  been  nominated  to  be  a  Member  of  the 
National  Transportation  Safety  Board.  The  investigations  into  the 
recent  school  bus  accident  in  Alabama,  the  plane  crash  in  Lex-
ington, Kentucky, and I can tell you about the one that I personally 
was  involved  in  and  survived.  The  other  was  the  Alaska  Airlines 
crash that my great friend, former head of the BIA, Morris Thomp-
son,  his  wife  Thelma  and  members  of  his  family  were  killed.  We 
have  seen  the  work  of  the  NTSB,  and  I  think  it’s  one  of  the  fine 
agencies  of  our  Federal  Government.  I  look  forward  to  Mr. 
Chealander’s  comments  about  what  he  thinks  can  be  done  to  im-
prove this vital agency. 

Senator  Hutchison  has  submitted  a  statement  for  the  record  in 
support  of  your  nomination,  Mr.  Chealander,  and  it  will  be  in-
cluded in the record. 

Mr.  Charles  Dorkey  has  been  nominated  to  be  a  Member  of  the 
Advisory  Board  of  the  Saint  Lawrence  Seaway  Development  Cor-

(1)

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

2

poration.  Mr.  Dorkey  has  been  an  active  and  dedicated  resident  of 
the State of New York, serving in positions with the Hudson River 
Park  Trust,  the  Empire  State  Development  Corporation,  and  the 
New York Park and Conservation Association, among other things. 
I  have  personally  gone  through  both  of  the  FBI  investigations  of 
your  qualifications  and  your  background,  and  I’m  very  pleased  to 
say that we’re happy to have you join the Federal Government with 
such  distinguished  careers  behind  you.  I  understand  some  of  the 
members  of  your  family  are  here.  I  hope  that  you  will  introduce 
your  family  or  friends  who  are  here  with  you  today  before  you 
make your statement. 

Senator  Inouye’s  statement  will  appear  in  the  record  at  this 
place  if  he  gets  here.  If  he  doesn’t  get  here,  it  will  be  inserted  in 
the record. 

[The prepared statement of Senator Inouye follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. DANIEL K. INOUYE, U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII 
I would like to welcome Mr. Chealander and Mr. Dorkey for appearing before the 

Senate Commerce Committee. 

The work of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is vital to the safe-
ty  and  integrity  of  the  Nation’s  transportation  infrastructure.  Having  the  full  five-
member Board in place is crucial for addressing new challenges that arise regularly, 
and  for  continuing  the  high-level  investigative  work  for  which  the  NTSB  is  known. 
The Saint Lawrence Seaway remains one of the critical port systems for the U.S. 
transportation  system,  and  provides  a  critical  link  to  mid-America.  Mr.  Dorkey,  as 
a  nominee  to  serve  on  the  Saint  Lawrence  Seaway  Development  Corporation 
(SLSDC),  I  am  hopeful  that,  if  confirmed,  your  background  and  experience  will  as-
sist  with  the  work  that  is  being  done  to  ensure  the  flow  of  commerce  on  this  vital 
infrastructure. 

I  thank  you  both  for  your  commitment  to  public  service  and  I  look  forward  to 

hearing your views as we consider your nominations.

The CHAIRMAN. Let me first call on you, Mr. Chealander. You are 
a  resident  of  Texas,  I  understand,  to  be  a  Member  of  the  National 
Transportation Safety Board. I’d be pleased if you would introduce 
your family or friends. 
STATEMENT  OF  STEVEN  R.  CHEALANDER,  NOMINEE  TO  BE  A 
MEMBER  OF  THE  NATIONAL  TRANSPORTATION  SAFETY 
BOARD 
Mr.  CHEALANDER.  Yes,  and  good  morning,  and  thank  you,  Mr. 
Chairman.  I  am  pleased  and  honored  to  appear  before  you  today 
as  you  consider  my  nomination  to  be  a  Member  of  the  National 
Transportation  Safety  Board.  I  am  grateful  to  President  Bush  for 
this  nomination,  and  especially  for  his  confidence  in  my  ability  to 
continue  to  serve  our  great  nation  in  this  vitally  important  posi-
tion, should I be confirmed. 

Good morning, Mr. Inouye. 
I would also like to recognize and thank Chairman Rosenker and 
the  other  current  and  former  board  members,  many  of  whom  are 
present here today, for their support. If confirmed, I intend to work 
diligently to contribute to the Safety Board’s mission of preventing 
transportation  accidents  and  maintaining  the  trust  and  confidence 
of the traveling public in our transportation system. 

I  would  also  like  to  thank  Senator  Kay  Bailey  Hutchison  from 
my home State of Texas for her kind introduction, support, and for 
her leadership on this Committee. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

3

As a career military officer, I would also like to add my personal 
thanks  for  the  record  you,  Senator  Stevens,  Senator  Inouye,  and 
the  distinguished  Members  of  this  Committee,  for  your  military 
and  government  service  to  our  country.  I  look  fondly  back  on  my 
own active military tours, and appreciate others who answered the 
call  to  public  service,  particularly  those  who  began  their  careers 
with service in the military and then accepted a further call to pub-
lic service in the Congress. 

And with your permission I would like to introduce my long-time 
best  friend  and  the  wind  beneath  my  wings,  my  wife,  Rebecca.  I 
am so glad that she was able to be here today with me, as she has 
walked alongside me in countless other professional endeavors over 
our 34 years of marriage. For those of you who don’t know, we were 
in Washington many years ago when I had the privilege of serving 
as  military  aide  to  President  Reagan.  We  are  honored  to  have  the 
opportunity to serve the country as a team once more. My wife, Re-
becca. 

The CHAIRMAN. Good morning, Rebecca. 
Mr. CHEALANDER. As I’m sure you will agree, America’s extensive 
transportation industry is one of our most important economic sec-
tors and can easily be characterized as the lifeblood of our economy 
and  a  national  treasure.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  that  we  nurture 
that sector by ensuring the safe movement of people and products. 
It  was  with  that  idea  in  mind  that  Congress  saw  fit  to  establish 
the National Transportation Safety Board with the goal of enhanc-
ing transportation safety. 

If confirmed, I pledge to you my commitment to making a mean-
ingful  contribution  to  the  NTSB  and  helping  it  perform  the  role 
Congress  intended.  While  working  diligently  to  maintain  the  inde-
pendence of the Board, which has remained the desire of Congress 
since  the  Board’s  creation,  I  also  pledge  that  I  will  work  to  ensure 
the  Board  and  this  Committee  have  a  cooperative,  productive,  and 
active  working  relationship,  one  which  results  in  enhanced  safety 
for the American traveling public. 

I  am  humbled  by  the  prospect  of  serving  our  country  as  a  board 
member of the NTSB. I believe there is no higher honor or greater 
opportunity for one who has spent two careers in which safety has 
been the highest priority, than to hold a position of trust in an or-
ganization dedicated to safety of the American public. 

I look forward, if confirmed, to making contributions toward safe-
ty of our transportation system and thereby the public’s confidence 
in  that  transportation  system.  Through  those  contributions,  I  hope 
to  help  strengthen  an  industry  vital  to  America’s  overall  economic 
and  national  security.  Also,  I  restate  my  pledge  to  you,  Mr.  Chair-
man,  and  each  Member  of  this  Committee,  of  my  unfaltering  com-
mitment to the safety of our Nation’s traveling public. 

Sir, I look forward to answering your questions. 
[The  prepared  statement  and  biographical  information  of  Mr. 

Chealander follow:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF STEVEN R. CHEALANDER, NOMINEE TO BE A MEMBER OF 

THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD 

Good morning and thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Co-Chairman and distinguished 
Members  of  the  Committee.  I  am  pleased  and  honored  to  appear  before  you  today 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

4

as you consider my nomination to be a Member of the National Transportation Safe-
ty Board (NTSB). I am grateful to President Bush for this nomination and especially 
for  his  confidence  in  my  ability  to  continue  to  serve  our  great  nation  in  this  vitally 
important  position,  should  I  be  confirmed.  I  would  also  like  to  recognize  and  thank 
Chairman  Rosenker  and  the  other  current  and  former  Board  Members,  many  of 
whom  are  present  here  today,  for  their  support.  If  confirmed,  I  intend  to  work  dili-
gently to contribute to the Safety Board’s mission of preventing transportation acci-
dents and maintaining the trust and confidence of the traveling public in our trans-
portation system. 

I  would  also  like  to  thank  Senator  Kay  Bailey  Hutchison  from  my  home  State  of 
Texas  for  her  kind  introduction,  support  and  for  her  leadership  on  this  Committee. 
As  a  career  military  officer  I  would  also  like  to  add  my  personal  thanks  for  the 
record,  to  you,  Senator  Stevens,  Senator  Inouye  and  the  distinguished  Members  of 
this  Committee  for  their  military  and  government  service  to  our  country.  I  look 
fondly  back  on  my  own  active  duty  military  tours  and  appreciate  others  who  an-
swered a call to public service, particularly those who began their careers with serv-
ice  in  the  military,  and  then  accepted  a  further  call  to  public  service  in  Congress. 
With  your  permission  I  would  like  to  introduce  my  long-time  best  friend  and  the 
wind  beneath  my  wings,  my  wife,  Rebecca.  I  am  so  glad  that  she  was  able  to  be 
here with me today, as she has walked alongside me in countless other professional 
endeavors  over  our  34  years  of  marriage.  For  those  who  don’t  know,  we  were  in 
Washington many years ago when I had the privilege of serving as the Military Aide 
to  President  Reagan.  We  are  honored  to  have  the  opportunity  to  serve  the  country 
as a team once more. 

As  I  am  sure  you  will  agree,  America’s  extensive  transportation  industry  is  one 
of  our  most  important  economic  sectors  and  can  easily  be  characterized  as  the  life-
blood of our economy and a national treasure. Therefore, it is essential that we nur-
ture that sector by ensuring the safe movement of people and products. It was with 
that  idea  in  mind  that  Congress  saw  fit  to  establish  the  National  Transportation 
Safety Board with the goal of enhancing transportation safety. If confirmed, I pledge 
to  you  my  commitment  to  making  a  meaningful  contribution  to  the  NTSB  and  to 
helping it perform the role Congress intended. While working diligently to maintain 
the independence of the Board, which has remained the desire of Congress since the 
Board’s  creation,  I  also  pledge  that  I  will  work  to  ensure  that  the  Board  and  this 
Committee have a cooperative, productive, and active working relationship which re-
sults in enhanced safety for the American traveling public. 

For nearly forty years, the National Transportation Safety Board has been at the 
forefront  of  transportation  safety  issues  and  has  been  the  conscience  of  America’s 
transportation network. The NTSB is renowned as our Nation’s premier accident in-
vestigation  agency,  but  is  also  recognized  as  the  most  authoritative,  independent 
safety  body  in  the  world.  That  reputation,  and  by  extension  that  credibility,  is  the 
product  of  a  team  of  safety  professionals  committed  to  excellence  in  its  conduct  of 
unbiased  investigations  into  transportation  accidents.  It  is  also  a  result  of  the  fore-
sight exhibited by Congress to ensure the organizational independence of the NTSB 
when it reasoned ‘‘no Federal agency can properly perform such [investigatory] func-
tions  unless  it  is  totally  separate  and  independent  from  any  other . . . agency  of 
the  United  States.’’  The  dedicated  men  and  women  who  make  up  the  staff  of  the 
NTSB  have  made  tremendous  strides  in  making  each  one  of  our  Nation’s  transpor-
tation modes safer and thus stronger. 

I  am  humbled  by  the  prospect  of  serving  our  country  as  a  board  member  of  the 
NTSB.  I  believe  there  is  no  higher  honor  or  greater  opportunity  for  one  who  has 
spent  two  careers  in  which  safety  has  been  of  the  highest  priority,  than  to  hold  a 
position  of  trust  in  an  organization  dedicated  to  the  safety  of  the  American  public. 
I am energized by the possibility, if confirmed, of being part of the leadership of this 
incredibly competent team of safety experts and advocates. I believe that my diverse 
operational and management experiences in aviation, both military and commercial, 
give  me  an  excellent  background  with  which  to  serve  as  a  board  member  on  the 
NTSB. 

Mr.  Chairman,  my  background  includes  a  combination  of  experience  in  aviation, 
aviation  management,  accident  and  incident  investigation,  teaching  human  factors 
and  its  relationship  to  transportation  safety,  and  leading  pilots  in  safe  flight  oper-
ations.  I  have  been  an  active  aviator  for  almost  33  years  now,  and  know  full  well 
that  safety  in  flight  operations,  and  in  all  modes  of  transportation  operations,  is  in 
some  significant  part  a  product  of  recommendations  and  lessons  learned  passed  on 
from investigative bodies such as the NTSB. 

I  look  forward,  if  confirmed,  to  making  contributions  toward  the  safety  of  our 
transportation  system,  and  thereby  the  public’s  confidence  in  that  transportation 
system. Through those contributions, I hope to help strengthen an industry vital to 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

5

America’s  overall  economic  and  national  security.  Also,  I  restate  my  pledge  to  you, 
Mr. Chairman, and each Member of this Committee, of my unfaltering commitment 
to the safety of our Nation’s traveling public. 

Sir, I look forward to answering any questions. 

A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION 

1.  Name  (Include  any  former  names  or  nicknames  used):  Steven  R.  Chealander. 
2. Position to which Nominated: Board Member, NTSB. 
3. Date of Nomination: September 21, 2006. 
4. Address (List current place of residence and office addresses):

Residence: information not released to the public.
Office: American Airlines Flight Academy, DFW Airport, TX 75261.

5. Date and Place of Birth: November 14, 1946, Los Angeles, CA. 
6.  Provide  the  name,  position,  and  place  of  employment  for  your  spouse  (if  mar-
ried)  and  the  names  and  ages  of  your  children  (including  stepchildren  and  children 
by a previous marriage).

Wife: Rebecca Chealander, not employed. 
Daughter: Ann Lapinsky, 29 years old. 
Daughter: Lael Chealander, 27 years old.

7.  List  all  college  and  graduate  degrees.  Provide  year  and  school  attended:  Bach-

elor of Science, 1973, University of Southern California. 

8.  List  all  management-level  jobs  held  and  any  non-managerial  jobs  that  relate 

to the position for which you are nominated.

Manager,  Flight  Operations  Efficiency,  American  Airlines,  June,  2003–present.
Manager,  Flight  Safety—Internal  Evaluation  and  Compliance,  American  Air-
lines, January–June 2003.
F–16 Tactical Fighter Squadron Commander, USAF, 1989–1991.
F–5 Tactical Fighter Squadron Commander, USAF, 1988–1989.

9. List any advisory, consultative, honorary or other part-time service or positions 
with Federal, State, or local governments, other than those listed above, within the 
last 5 years: None. 

10.  List  all  positions  held  as  an  officer,  director,  trustee,  partner,  proprietor, 
agent, representative, or consultant of any corporation, company, firm, partnership, 
or  other  business,  enterprise,  educational  or  other  institution  within  the  last  5 
years: Director on the Board of Directors, Thunderbirds Alumni Association, Novem-
ber 2005–present. 

11.  Please  list  each  membership  you  have  had  during  the  past  10  years  or  cur-
rently hold with any civic, social, charitable, educational, political, professional, fra-
ternal, benevolent or religious organization, private club, or other membership orga-
nization. Include dates of membership and any positions you have held with any or-
ganization. Please note whether any such club or organization restricts membership 
on  the  basis  of  sex,  race,  color,  religion,  national  origin,  age  or  handicap:  Member 
of Trophy Club Country Club, Trophy Club, TX, April 1, 2005–present; (Trophy Club 
has no restrictive membership policies). 

12. Have you ever been a candidate for public office? No. 
13.  Itemize  all  political  contributions  to  any  individual,  campaign  organization, 
political  party,  political  action  committee,  or  similar  entity  of  $500  or  more  for  the 
past 10 years: None. 

14. List all scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, honorary society member-
ships,  military  medals  and  any  other  special  recognition  for  outstanding  service  or 
achievements.

Defense Superior Service Medal, July 1988. 
Distinguished Flying Cross, 1984. 
Air Medal, 1984.

15.  Please  list  each  book,  article,  column,  or  publication  you  have  authored,  indi-
vidually  or  with  others,  and  any  speeches  that  you  have  given  on  topics  relevant 
to  the  position  for  which  you  have  been  nominated.  Do  not  attach  copies  of  these 
publications unless otherwise instructed: None. 

16.  Please  identify  each  instance  in  which  you  have  testified  orally  or  in  writing 
before  Congress  in  a  nongovernmental  capacity  and  specify  the  subject  matter  of 
each testimony: None. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

6

B. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

1.  Describe  all  financial  arrangements,  deferred  compensation  agreements,  and 

other continuing dealings with business associates, clients, or customers: None. 

2.  Do  you  have  any  commitments  or  agreements,  formal  or  informal,  to  maintain 
employment, affiliation or practice with any business, association or other organiza-
tion during your appointment? If so, please explain. 

No, I am presently employed by American Airlines, and, if confirmed as a Member 
of  the  Board  of  the  NTSB,  will  retire  after  more  than  15  years  of  service.  I  have 
no  commitment  or  agreement  of  any  type  to  maintain  employment,  affiliation  or 
practice  with  American  Airlines  or  any  other  business,  association  or  organization 
during my appointment as a Board Member. 

3.  Indicate  any  investments,  obligations,  liabilities,  or  other  relationships  which 
could  involve  potential  conflicts  of  interest  in  the  position  to  which  you  have  been 
nominated. 

All potential conflicts of interest have been identified on my Public Financial Dis-
closure  Report  (SF  278)  and  have  been  discussed  in  my  Ethics  Agreement  letter, 
dated  September  22,  2006,  which  I  have  previously  provided  to  the  Designated 
Agency Ethics Official (DAEO) of the National Transportation Safety Board. The po-
tential  sources  of  conflict  are  summarized  as  follows;  vested  American  Airlines 
(AMR)  Stock  Options,  Preferred  Stock  in  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric  (PGE)  and  Gen-
eral  Electric  Company  (GE).  Additionally,  pursuant  to  my  service  with  American 
Airlines,  upon  retirement,  I  will  be  entitled  to  the  provision,  by  American  Airlines, 
of  payment  for  medical  insurance  benefits  for  my  spouse  and  myself.  Finally,  my 
spouse  and  I  will  be  entitled  to  flight  benefits  with  American  Airlines,  which  will 
involve flying stand-by 

4.  Describe  any  business  relationship,  dealing,  or  financial  transaction  which  you 
have had during the last 5 years, whether for yourself, on behalf of a client, or act-
ing  as  an  agent,  that  could  in  any  way  constitute  or  result  in  a  possible  conflict  of 
interest in the position to which you have been nominated: None. 

5. Describe any activity during the past 5 years in which you have been engaged 
for the purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modifica-
tion of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law or public 
policy: None. 

6.  Explain  how  you  will  resolve  any  potential  conflict  of  interest,  including  any 

that may be disclosed by your responses to the above items. 

If  I  am  confirmed  as  a  Member  of  the  Board,  within  90  days  of  the  date  of  that 
confirmation,  I  will  divest  my  preferred  stock  in  GE  and  PGE  and  will  exercise  my 
vested  stock  options  in  American  Airlines  and,  in  turn,  will  divest  the  stock  in 
American  Airlines.  In  view  of  the  continuing  relationship  that  I  will  have  with 
American  Airlines  because  of  my  entitlement  to  the  payment  of  insurance  benefits 
and flight benefits, as I have indicated in my ethics agreement, I will recuse myself 
from  investigations  or  other  matters  before  the  Board  in  which  American  Airlines 
is or represents a party. 

C. LEGAL MATTERS 

1.  Have  you  ever  been  disciplined  or  cited  for  a  breach  of  ethics  by,  or  been  the 
subject of a complaint to any court, administrative agency, professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other professional group? No. 

2.  Have  you  ever  been  investigated,  arrested,  charged,  or  held  by  any  Federal, 
State,  or  other  law  enforcement  authority  of  any  Federal,  State,  county,  or  munic-
ipal  entity,  other  than  for  a  minor  traffic  offense?  If  so,  please  explain:  DUI  1972, 
California Highway Patrol, Los Angeles County Municipal Court, Malibu, California. 
The final disposition was a $182 fine. 

3.  Have  you  or  any  business  of  which  you  are  or  were  an  officer  ever  been  in-

volved as a party in an administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? No. 

4.  Have  you  ever  been  convicted  (including  pleas  of  guilty  or  nolo  contendere)  of 
any criminal violation other than a minor traffic offense? If so, please explain: (See 
Question 2, above). 

5.  Please  advise  the  Committee  of  any  additional  information,  favorable  or  unfa-
vorable,  which  you  feel  should  be  disclosed  in  connection  with  your  nomination: 
None. 

6.  Have  you  ever  been  accused,  formally  or  informally,  of  sexual  harassment  or 

discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion or any other basis? No. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

7

D. RELATIONSHIP WITH COMMITTEE 

1. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with deadlines for infor-

mation set by Congressional committees? 

Yes. The importance of a sound relationship between the National Transportation 
Safety Board and Congress cannot be overstated, and I will do my utmost to ensure 
the  Safety  Board  is  responsive  to  Congress  and  those  committees  with  which  the 
Safety Board routinely has a relationship. 

2.  Will  you  ensure  that  your  department/agency  does  whatever  it  can  to  protect 
Congressional  witnesses  and  whistle  blowers  from  reprisal  for  their  testimony  and 
disclosures? 

Yes,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  and  always  when  during  the  performance  of  my 
duties  as  a  Member  of  the  Safety  Board  I  participate  in  management  activities  af-
fecting the rights and benefits of Safety Board employees. 

3.  Will  you  cooperate  in  providing  the  Committee  with  requested  witnesses,  in-
cluding technical experts and career employees, with firsthand knowledge of matters 
of interest to the Committee? 

Yes, If I am confirmed, I will do my part to ensure that the Safety Board provides 
that cooperation and support to the best of my ability. The Safety Board, as the first 
Federal  agency  on  scene  in  many  instances,  and  with  the  charge  from  Congress  to 
independently determine the probable cause of accidents and make meaningful rec-
ommendations to avoid further accidents, will have transportation-related expertise 
residing  in  its  investigators,  scientists  and  engineers.  Congress  will  often  need  to 
access  this  expertise  as  it  contemplates  legislation.  I  fully  recognize  that  Congress 
needs the cooperation and support of the Safety Board as Congress seeks to fashion 
meaningful  remedies  from  Safety  Board  findings  and  recommendations.  Again,  I 
will do my best to provide that support. 

4.  Are  you  willing  to  appear  and  testify  before  any  duly  constituted  committee  of 

the Congress on such occasions as you may be reasonably requested to do so? 

Yes.  It  is  my  opinion  that  such  appearances  and  testimony  will  be  a  significant 
part  of  my  responsibilities  as  a  Board  Member.  Also,  in  my  opinion,  an  open  and 
thorough dialogue between the Safety Board and Congress is essential in advancing 
transportation safety in the United States, and around the globe.

The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. 
Mr. Dorkey, I would be happy to have your comments, and intro-

duce your family if you will. 
STATEMENT  OF  CHARLES  E.  DORKEY  III,  NOMINEE  TO  BE  A 
MEMBER  OF  THE  ADVISORY  BOARD  OF  THE  SAINT
LAWRENCE SEAWAY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
Mr.  DORKEY.  Yes,  sir.  Before  proceeding  I’d  like  to  introduce  my 
girlfriend,  Carolyn  Pilkington,  who  is  right  behind  me  here,  Sen-
ator. Thank you. 

The CHAIRMAN. Good morning. 
Mr. DORKEY. Chairman Stevens, Co-Chairman Inouye, and Mem-
bers  of  the  Committee,  it  is  an  honor  for  me  to  appear  before  you 
today as President Bush’s nominee to serve as a member of the Ad-
visory Board of the Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corpora-
tion. If confirmed, I look forward to working closely with the Com-
mittee on issues related to the vital work performed by the Seaway 
Corporation. 

I  am  humbled  to  be  asked  to  serve  as  a  public  member  of  this 
board.  As  a  lawyer  in  private  practice,  I  believe  it  is  essential  for 
one  to  give  back  to  society  and  to  assist  in  the  administration  of 
government.  I  am  flattered  and  pleased  that  I  will  be  able  to  do 
so  for  this  wholly-owned  government  corporation.  My  past  experi-
ence, I respectfully submit, has prepared me for this board. 

For  the  last  10  years,  I  have  served  as  a  board  member  of  the 
New  York  State  Economic  Development  Corporation,  and  know 
how  essential  it  is  to  help  the  economy  of  New  York’s  north  coun-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

8

try,  where  the  Seaway  has  its  operations.  For  the  last  4  years,  I 
have  served  as  Chairman  of  the  Hudson  River  Park  Trust,  and 
have gotten to learn how important waterways are for business and 
recreational interests of our citizens. 

As  someone  who  has  worked  as  a  public  member  of  government 
entities  and  corporations,  I  also  know  how  important  it  is  that 
there  be  communications  with  all  stakeholders,  that  decisions  af-
fecting  people  and  interests  be  principled,  explained,  and  trans-
parent, and that the public interest always comes first. 

And,  as  a  partner  in  a  U.S.-Canadian  law  firm,  I  have  learned 
a  great  deal  about  the  society  and  culture  of  our  important  neigh-
bor  to  the  north,  and  believe  that  this  experience  will  give  me  a 
deep and sensitive understanding of shared cross-border issues. 

In  closing,  let  me  assure  you  and  all  Members  of  Congress  that 
I  will  do  everything  in  my  power  and  within  my  ability  to  ensure 
that  the  Saint  Lawrence  Seaway  Development  Corporation  con-
tinues  to  operate  in  a  cost-effective  and  transparent  manner,  and 
that  it  continues  to  serve  as  an  environmentally  responsible  impe-
tus  to  trade  and  the  economic  well-being  of  not  only  the  Great 
Lakes region it directly serves, but the entire United States. 

Thank you, Senators. 
[The  prepared  statement  and  biographical  information  of  Mr. 

Dorkey follow:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHARLES E.  DORKEY III,  NOMINEE TO BE A MEMBER OF 
THE ADVISORY BOARD OF THE SAINT LAWRENCE SEAWAY DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION 
Chairman Stevens, Co-Chairman Inouye and Members of the Committee, it is an 
honor  for  me  to  appear  before  you  today  as  President  Bush’s  nominee  to  serve  as 
a  Member  of  the  Advisory  Board  at  the  Saint  Lawrence  Seaway  Development  Cor-
poration.  If  confirmed,  I  look  forward  to  working  closely  with  the  Committee  on 
issues related to the vital work performed by the Seaway Corporation. 

I am humbled to be asked to serve as a public member of this board. As a lawyer 
in  private  practice,  I  believe  that  it  is  essential  for  one  to  give  back  to  society  and 
to assist in the administration of government. I am flattered and pleased that I will 
be  able  to  do  so  for  this  wholly-owned  government  corporation.  My  past  experience 
has prepared me for this board. 

For  the  last  10  years,  I  have  served  as  a  board  member  of  the  New  York  State 
Economic  Development  Corporation  and  know  how  essential  it  is  to  help  the  econ-
omy  of  New  York’s  North  Country—where  the  Seaway  has  its  operations.  For  the 
last  4  years,  I  have  served  as  Chairman  of  the  Hudson  River  Park  Trust  and  have 
gotten to learn how important waterways are for business and recreational interests 
of our citizens. As someone who has worked as a public member of government enti-
ties and corporations, I know how important it is that there be communication with 
all  stakeholders,  that  decisions  affecting  people  and  interests  be  principled,  ex-
plained and transparent and that the public interest always comes first. 

As  a  partner  in  a  U.S.-Canadian  law  firm,  I  have  learned  a  great  deal  about  the 
society and culture about our important neighbor to the north and believe that this 
experience  will  give  me  a  deep  and  sensitive  understanding  of  shared  cross-border 
issues. 

In  closing,  let  me  assure  you  that  I  will  do  everything  in  my  power  and  within 
my ability to ensure that the Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation con-
tinues  to  operate  in  a  cost-effective  and  transparent  manner  and  that  it  continues 
to serve as an environmentally-responsible impetus to trade and the economic well-
being of not only to the Great Lakes region it directly serves, but the entire United 
States. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

9

A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION 

nickname ‘‘Trip.’’

2.  Position  to  which  Nominated:  Member  of  Advisory  Board  of  St.  Lawrence  Sea-

1.  Name  (Include  any  former  names  or  nicknames  used):  Charles  E.  Dorkey  III, 

way Development Corporation. 

3. Date of Nomination: November 13, 2006. 
4. Address (List current place of residence and office addresses):

Residence: information not released to the public.
Office:  Torys  LLP,  237  Park  Avenue,  20th  Floor  New  York,  New  York  10017.

5. Date and Place of Birth: June 23, 1948, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
6.  Provide  the  name,  position,  and  place  of  employment  for  your  spouse  (if  mar-
ried)  and  the  names  and  ages  of  your  children  (including  stepchildren  and  children 
by a previous marriage).

Charles E. Dorkey IV (29). 
John H. Dorkey (24). 
Margaret L. Dorkey (22).

7. List all college and graduate degrees. provide year and school attended.

J.D., 1973, University of Pennsylvania Law School. 
A.B. (cum laude), 1970, Dartmouth College.

8.  List  all  management-level  jobs  held  and  any  non-managerial  jobs  that  relate 
to  the  position  for  which  you  are  nominated:  Managing  Partner,  Torys  LLP,  Chair-
man, Hudson River Park Trust. 

9. List any advisory, consultative, honorary or other part-time service or positions 
with Federal, State, or local governments, other than those listed above, within the 
last 5 years: See resume. *

10.  List  all  positions  held  as  an  officer,  director,  trustee,  partner,  proprietor, 
agent, representative, or consultant of any corporation, company, firm, partnership, 
or  other  business,  enterprise,  educational  or  other  institution  within  the  last  5 
years: See resume. * 

11.  Please  list  each  membership  you  have  bad  during  the  past  10  years  or  cur-
rently hold with any civic, social, charitable, educational, political, professional, fra-
ternal, benevolent or religious organization, private club, or other membership orga-
nization. Include dates of membership and any positions you have held with any or-
ganization. Please note whether any such club or organization restricts membership 
on the basis of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, age or handicap.

Fraternal:

Theta Delta Chi, 1967–present. 
Holland Lodge No. 8F. & A.M., 2006–present. 
The Pilgrims, 2005–present. 
The Pennsylvania Society, 1981(?)–present.
(Both Holland Lodge and Theta Delta Chi are male fraternities).

Private Clubs:

Dartmouth (Yale) Club, 1975–present. 
New York Athletic Club, 1992–present. 
University Club (Admission Pending). 
Penn Club, 1988–mid-1990s. 
Heights Casino, 1994–late-1990s.

Political:

Committeeman, New York County Republican Party, 1993–1995.

12. Have you ever been a candidate for public office? No. 
13.  Itemize  all  political  contributions  to  any  individual,  campaign  organization, 
political  party,  political  action  committee,  or  similar  entity  of  $500  or  more  for  the 
past 10 years. 

See schedule A13 A. * To the best of my research, Schedule A13 reflects my polit-
ical  contributions.  In  order  to  be  complete,  I  caused  a  search  to  be  made  not  only 
of my and my firm’s check registers but also of various websites. 

* The information referred to has been retained in Committee files. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

10

14. List all scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, honorary society member-
ships,  military  medals  and  any  other  special  recognition  for  outstanding  service  or 
achievements: See resume. *

15.  Please  list  each  book,  article,  column,  or  publication  you  have  authored,  indi-
vidually  or  with  others,  and  any  speeches  that  you  have  given  on  topics  relevant 
to  the  position  for  which  you  have  been  nominated.  Do  not  attach  copies  of  these 
publications unless otherwise instructed: None. 

16.  Please  identify  each  instance  in  which  you  have  testified  orally  or  in  writing 
before  Congress  in  a  non-governmental  capacity  and  specify  the  subject  matter  of 
each testimony: None. 

B. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

1.  Describe  all  financial  arrangements,  deferred  compensation  agreements,  and 
other continuing dealings with business associates, clients, or customers: I will con-
tinue as a partner of Torys LLP. 

2.  Do  you  have  any  commitments  or  agreements,  formal  or  informal,  to  maintain 
employment, affiliation or practice with any business, association or other organiza-
tion  during  your  appointment?  If  so,  please  explain:  I  will  continue  as  a  partner  of 
Torys LLP. 

3.  Indicate  any  investments,  obligations,  liabilities,  or  other  relationships  which 
could  involve  potential  conflicts  of  interest  in  the  position  to  which  you  have  been 
nominated. 

To my knowledge, none. Please refer to the Deputy General Counsel, Department 

of Transportation opinion letter. * 

4.  Describe  any  business  relationship,  dealing,  or  financial  transaction  which  you 
have had during the last 5 years, whether for yourself, on behalf of a client, or act-
ing  as  an  agent,  that  could  in  any  way  constitute  or  result  in  a  possible  conflict  of 
interest in the position to which you have been nominated: To my knowledge, none. 
5. Describe any activity during the past 5 years in which you have been engaged 
for the purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modifica-
tion of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law or public 
policy. 

As  I  understand  the  question,  none.  In  my  work  in  various  non-paying  govern-
ment  positions,  I  have  acted  to  affect  the  administration  and  execution  of  law  and 
public policy. 

6.  Explain  how  you  will  resolve  any  potential  conflict  of  interest,  including  any 

that may be disclosed by your responses to the above items. 

Generally,  the  way  to  resolve  a  potential  conflict  of  interest  would  be  to  recuse 
oneself from the matter at issue. I would be guided by the advice of the senior ethics 
official, Department of Transportation. Please refer to the Deputy General Counsel, 
Department of Transportation opinion letter. *

C. LEGAL MATTERS 

1.  Have  you  ever  been  disciplined  or  cited  for  a  breach  of  ethics  by,  or  been  the 
subject of a complaint to any court, administrative agency, professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other professional group? If so, please explain. 

In  1983,  my  adversary  complained  to  the  First  Department  Disciplinary  Com-
mittee that I had spoken to her outside the presence of her counsel. After an inves-
tigation, the matter was dismissed as groundless. 

2.  Have  you  ever  been  investigated,  arrested,  charged,  or  held  by  any  Federal, 
State,  or  other  law  enforcement  authority  of  any  Federal,  State,  county,  or  munic-
ipal entity, other than for a minor traffic offense? It so, please explain. 

None  after  the  age  of  18.  I  have  twice  been  taken  into  custody,  once  when  I  was 
15  for  mischief  and  once  when  I  was  17  for  shoplifting.  On  neither  occasion  was  I 
charged and on both I was released in the custody of my parents. 

3.  Have  you  or  any  business  of  which  you  are  or  were  an  officer  ever  been  in-

volved as a party in an administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? No. 

4.  Have  you  ever  been  convicted  (including  pleas  of  guilty  or  nolo  contendere)  of 

any criminal violation other than a minor traffic offense? No. 

5.  Please  advise  the  Committee  of  any  additional  information,  favorable  or  unfa-
vorable,  which  you  feel  should  be  disclosed  in  connection  with  your  nomination: 
Nothing unfavorable. 

6.  Have  you  ever  been  accused,  formally  or  informally,  of  sexual  harassment  or 

discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion or any other basis? No. 

* The information referred to has been retained in Committee files. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

11

D. RELATIONSHIP WITH COMMITTEE 

1. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with deadlines for infor-

mation set by Congressional committees? Yes. 

2.  Will  you  ensure  that  your  department/agency  does  whatever  it  can  to  protect 
Congressional  witnesses  and  whistle  blowers  from  reprisal  for  their  testimony  and 
disclosures? Yes. 

3.  Will  you  cooperate  in  providing  the  Committee  with  requested  witnesses,  in-
cluding technical experts and career employees, with firsthand knowledge of matters 
of interest to the Committee? Yes. 

4.  Are  you  willing  to  appear  and  testify  before  any  duly  constituted  committee  of 
the  Congress  on  such  occasions  as  you  may  be  reasonably  requested  to  do  so?  Yes.

The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. 
Senator Inouye? 

STATEMENT OF HON. DANIEL K. INOUYE,

U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII 

Senator INOUYE. Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much. 
Mr.  Chealander,  I’m  impressed  by  your  aviation  background.  As 
you  are  well  aware,  when  the  NTSB  was  originally  formed,  it  was 
on  the  mission  of  investigating  aviation  accidents.  However,  since 
then  accidents  and  deaths  occurring  in  other  modes  of  transpor-
tation  have  more  than  doubled.  In  fact,  they’re  much  more  than 
aviation. And yet we find that your agency has more than twice the 
number  of  investigators  for  aviation  than  for  all  other  modes  com-
bined.  Do  you  believe  that  there  should  be  some  consideration  of 
changing  the  authorization  law  so  that  other  modes  of  transpor-
tation would be given equal consideration? 

Mr.  CHEALANDER.  Well,  based  on  my  limited  knowledge  of  how 
it  works,  I  realize  that  aviation  is  the  major  part  of  the  inves-
tigating body. NTSB was chartered to investigate all aviation acci-
dents, and other modes of transportation. 

And  I  will  commit  to  you,  as  I  said  in  my  opening  statement, 
Senator,  that  I  will  do  everything  in  my  power  to  learn  about  the 
other  modes  of  transportation  and  determine  whether  or  not  down 
the line the authorization should be changed. I’m not in a position 
to make that statement at this time. 

Senator INOUYE. I thank you. No other questions. 
The CHAIRMAN. Well, thank you. 
Mr.  Chealander,  I  think  that  the  Board  ought  to  go  further,  go 
out  ahead  of  the  curve  and  see  what  we’re  doing  as  far  as  safety 
is concerned. Do you, as a Member of the Board, have any feelings 
about that? You understand what I’m saying? 

Mr. CHEALANDER. No, sir. 
The CHAIRMAN. Well, the Board traditionally just investigates ac-

cidents after they happen. 

Mr. CHEALANDER. Yes. 
The  CHAIRMAN.  I  have  a  feeling  that  in  some  instances  particu-
larly  a  man  with  your  background,  and  other  members  of  the 
Board,  could  sort  of  oversee  a  lot  of  other  things  and  maybe  come 
up  with  some  ideas  about  prevention.  To  my  knowledge  it  has  not 
in  the  past,  but  I  think  it’s  within  the  scope  of  your  charter,  so  to 
speak, of the Board. 

Mr.  CHEALANDER.  I  absolutely  agree,  and  I  believe  the  NTSB  at 
the  present  time  has  what  they  call  their  ‘‘most  wanted’’  list  that 
they  come  out  with  each  year.  Those  are  preventative-type  meas-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

12

ures.  I  just  happen  to  have,  I  pulled  it  up  on  the  Internet  and  I 
got a copy of that myself, and there are several issues on the ‘‘most 
wanted’’ list that are preventative-type activities. 

But I do agree with you very much that we should be looking at 
preventative safety measures. That’s part of the education process. 
I believe very strongly in education and training in aviation in par-
ticular,  and  all  modes  of  transportation,  but  I  do  agree  that  pre-
ventative  measures  when  you’re  talking  safety  are  very,  very  im-
portant. 

The  CHAIRMAN.  When  I  went  out  and  met  with  members  of  the 
board  following  the  Alaska  Airlines  crash  in  which  my  two  friends 
and  their  family  were  killed,  we  had  the  indication  then  that  it 
quite possibly was the jackscrew that was in the tail of the aircraft, 
that gave it the ability to have its ailerons move. I think they came 
up with some great recommendations about future maintenance in 
order to prevent that type of accident. 

But I just wonder if the Board does in fact involve itself in look-
ing  into  the  basic  concepts  of  maintenance  and  safety  measures 
that  the  airlines  should  take.  You’ve  been  with  American  Airlines, 
as I understand it. 

Mr. CHEALANDER. Yes, sir. 
The  CHAIRMAN.  Maybe  I  shouldn’t  even  ask  you,  but  does  that 

board have a policy of looking into safety and prevention? 

Mr. CHEALANDER. The NTSB? 
The CHAIRMAN. Your American Airlines board. 
Mr. CHEALANDER. Yes, we do, and we follow very closely the rec-
ommendations of the NTSB in forming our policies and procedures 
to  go  forward.  But  yes,  safety  and  prevention  is  a  very  large  part 
of  what  we  do  at  American  Airlines,  and  all  the  airlines.  All  the 
airlines are very concerned with safety and what we can do to pre-
vent any type of mishap or accident. 

The  CHAIRMAN.  Well,  you’re  looking  at  the  two  Senators  who 
have flown more than any Senators in history, and we both believe 
that  God  doesn’t  charge  against  our  time  on  Earth  the  time  we 
spend  in  the  air.  But  at  the  same  time  we’re  very  conscious  of  the 
problems of aviation and the aging of our aircraft. I think that the 
Board  ought  to  reach  out  ahead  and  really  look  into  the  scope  of 
prevention in the American airlines. 

Mr.  Dorkey,  the  Saint  Lawrence  Seaway  Development  Corpora-
tion  really  has  some  monstrous  responsibilities  with  regard  to  ac-
cess  to  the  Great  Lakes.  Are  you  familiar  with  the  history  of  that 
organization? 

Mr. DORKEY. Yes, sir. Well, I’m not sure I’m as familiar as I will 
be, but yes, I’ve studied the history and the importance it is to the 
economy of the Great Lakes region. 

The  CHAIRMAN.  I  think,  you  know,  it  is  basically  a  board  to  de-
velop,  but  it  also  has  some  safety  factors,  too.  Have  you  studied 
their  methods  of  trying  to  assure  safety  in  the  operation  of  those 
systems  they’ve  got,  the  locks  and  the  access  through  the  Saint 
Lawrence down into the Great Lakes? 

Mr.  DORKEY.  Yes,  Senator.  I  think  it’s  a  very  important  part  of 
the responsibility of the Corporation, for the safety of the ships and 
the  safety  of  the  homeland  in  terms  of  overall  security,  to  make 
sure the locks are well-maintained. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

13

The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. 
Senator, do you have any questions? 
Senator  INOUYE.  I’d  just  like  to  commend  you  for  taking  on  this 
public  service.  Public  service  is  never  easy,  and  both  of  you,  I  con-
gratulate you. 

Mr. DORKEY. Thank you, Senator. 
Mr. CHEALANDER. Thank you, Senator. 
The CHAIRMAN. We congratulate you. Men with your background 
and  obvious  ability,  from  the  records  you’ve  had  in  the  past,  we’re 
delighted to have you join these two organizations. 

I want to state for the record we do have some, I hate to use the 
word ‘‘routine,’’ but the basic nominations for commissions and ad-
vancement in the Coast Guard and others, as I understand it, and 
it  would  be  my  request  that  we  discharge  the  Committee  from 
those  so  they  can  get  to  the  calendar  before  the  end  of  the  year. 

Senator INOUYE. I so move. 
The  CHAIRMAN.  That  will  be  the  policy  of  the  Committee,  unless 
we  hear  from  the  Committee  Members  through  their  staffs  that 
there  is  any  objection  to  any  of  those.  To  my  knowledge  there’s  no 
objection to any of them. 

We  thank  you  very  much,  and  thank  you  for  your  families.  We 
will  also  do  our  best  to  get  your  two  nominations  discharged  so 
that we can consider them before we adjourn. Thank you. 

Mr. DORKEY. Thank you, Chairman. 
Mr.  CHEALANDER.  Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman,  Mr.  Co-Chairman. 
[Whereupon, at 10:25 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.] 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

A P P E N D I X

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. KAY BAILEY HUTCHISON, U.S. SENATOR FROM TEXAS 
Mr.  Chairman,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  introduce  Steven  Chealander  before 

this Committee to be a Member of the National Transportation Safety Board. 

Today,  Mr.  Chealander  is  accompanied  by  his  wife,  Rebecca  Chealander.  He  is 

also supported by his daughters, Ann Lapinsky and Lael Chealander. 

Throughout  his  twenty-two  years  of  military  service  in  the  United  States  Air 
Force where he achieved the rank of Colonel, Mr. Chealander demonstrated proven 
leadership skills. 

Mr.  Chealander  has  been  awarded  the  Defense  Superior  Service  Medal,  the  Le-

gion of Merit, the Distinguished Flying Cross, and the Air Medal. 

A  two-time  Squadron  Commander  of  36  fighter  aircraft  squadrons,  fighter  pilots, 
and  associated  support  personnel,  Mr.  Chealander  also  managed  the  process  of  re-
constituting the United States Air Force Thunderbirds following the 1982 tragic ac-
cident  where  they  were  practicing  the  four  plane  diamond  loop.  As  manager,  Mr. 
Chealander  was 
investigation  of  the  accident,  the 
transitioning to the F–16 aircraft, as well as developed new training procedures for 
the Thunderbirds. 

in  the  safety 

Mr.  Chealander  is  clearly  no  stranger  to  safety.  He  served  as  the  Manager  of 
American  Airlines’  Flight  Safety—Internal  Evaluation  and  Compliance,  where  he 
worked with the FAA, labor unions, and representatives from all departments with-
in the airline performing regulatory safety audits and investigations. 

He  is  currently  the  Manager  of  American  Airline’s  Flight  Operations  Efficiency, 

involved 

a position he has held since 2003. 

Mr.  Chairman,  Mr.  Chealander  possesses  in-depth  knowledge  of  safety  as  it  re-
lates  to  aviation,  and  he  has  expressed  that  he  is  willing  to  work  very  closely  with 
Congress on all safety issues. 

Mr. Chairman, I urge this Committee to act favorably on Mr. Chealander’s nomi-
nation, and expedite his confirmation to be a Board member on the National Trans-
portation Safety Board. 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. OLYMPIA J. SNOWE, U.S. SENATOR FROM MAINE 
Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman  for  holding  this  hearing  today  to  help  the  Members  of 
the  Committee  get  to  know  the  nominees.  I  would  like  to  welcome  the  nominees  to 
the Committee. 

One  issue  that  is,  in  my  opinion,  very  significant  is  transportation  security.  The 
National  Transportation  Safety  Board  is  an  entity  that  serves  a  vital  role  in  pro-
tecting  travelers  across  all  modes  of  transportation,  and  is  relentlessly  vigilant  in 
seeking  out  means  to  improve  the  safety  of  America’s  traveling  public.  Its  contin-
uous efforts ensure safety improvements of aviation, rail, and waterborne transpor-
tation  are  to  be  applauded,  and  their  exhaustive  examinations  or  tragic  incidents 
permit us to discuss methods to prevent such incidents from happening again. From 
events  as  earthshaking  as  the  9/11  attacks  on  the  World  Trade  Center  Towers  to 
the urgent weather warnings to motorists facing winter storms, the National Trans-
portation  Safety  Board  has  a  role  to  play  in  protecting  our  citizens,  one  that  is  too 
often overlooked. 

There can be no ‘‘acceptable’’ level of injuries or fatalities. The very positive news 
that transportation deaths declined in 2005 is sadly balanced by the realization that 
we need to do more. 

On another front, I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate Mr. Charles 
Dorkey, a gentleman who has a sterling reputation for serving his community, pre-
serving critical historic landmarks and working diligently to provide recreational op-
portunities for his fellow New Yorkers. As a prominent graduate of Dartmouth Col-
lege, a successful and skilled lawyer, a strong proponent of community development, 
and an advocate for public lands and clean water, Mr. Dorkey is a well-rounded and 

(15)

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

16

knowledgeable individual who will work with our Canadian neighbors to guarantee 
the continued utilization and protection of the Saint Lawrence Seaway. 

In his new role as a member of the Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corpora-
tion,  I  feel  he  will  perform  admirably  in  this  position,  bringing  his  skills  to  bear  to 
aid  in  balancing  the  integral  commercial  access  provided  by  the  Saint  Lawrence, 
while being mindful of the delicate environmental impacts that this major waterway 
has on the Northeast United States. 

I am encouraged by the qualifications of both nominees, and look forward to work-

ing with them in their new positions. 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY HON. DANIEL K. INOUYE TO

STEVEN R. CHEALANDER 

Question 1. You have an impressive safety background within the aviation indus-
try.  Do  you  have  any  specific  areas  that  you  would  like  to  see  the  NTSB  focus  on 
if you are appointed to the Board? 

Answer.  If  confirmed,  I  will  join  the  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  with 
an  open  mind  and  no  predetermined  agenda.  I  have  served  over  33  years  in  the 
aviation community, first as a military pilot in the Air Force and then as a civilian 
airline  pilot—throughout  that  time,  safety  was  of  the  highest  priority.  If  I  come  to 
the  Safety  Board  with  any  predisposition,  it  is  with  a  focus  on,  and  absolute  belief 
in, the importance of proactive safety programs in transportation operations. I come 
to the NTSB with a ‘‘safety first’’ mindset. 

With  that  background  in  mind,  I  would  characterize  my  greatest  interest,  and 
where  I  might  encourage  the  NTSB  to  focus,  to  be  operational  safety  programs,  for 
example,  pilot  orientation  and  training  programs  (such  as  new-hire  training  pro-
grams)  and  the  methods  by  which  companies  instill  a  culture  of  safety  throughout 
the  organization.  I  am  also  very  interested  in  how  the  NTSB,  through  forums,  con-
ferences,  symposia,  and  safety  studies,  might  serve  a  role  in  encouraging  proactive 
and preventative activity on the part of operators in all modes of transportation. 

Lastly,  I  would  like  to  assure  the  Committee  that  my  background  as  an  airline 
pilot  in  the  most  recent  15  years  of  my  aviation  career  will  not  interfere  with  my 
objectivity  as  I  view  each  accident  investigation  that  staff  brings  before  the  Board.

Question 2. Do you have any experience with other modes of transportation? 
Answer. Even though I have a predominantly aviation background, I pledge to the 
Committee  my  commitment  to  diligently  studying  the  issues  in  the  other  transpor-
tation  modes,  actively  familiarizing  myself  with  operational  aspects  of  those  other 
modes of transportation, and carefully reviewing the facts and issues on each inves-
tigation report brought before the Board, regardless of mode. 

I  also  understand  that  my  most  significant  contributions  to  the  NTSB  will  not 
necessarily involve the operational experience I bring to the Board, but more impor-
tantly,  the  experience  I  have  with  how  organizations  manage  effective  programs 
such  as  an  operational  risk  management  program,  safety  training,  loss  prevention, 
and  very  important,  how  leadership  emphasizes  a  ‘‘safety  first’’  culture,  articulated 
from  the  top  down.  I  hope  to  bring  this  experience  to  discussions  with  NTSB  staff 
and deliberations with my colleagues, in all modes of transportation accident inves-
tigation.

Question 3. Given the importance of ensuring that safety is made the highest pri-
ority  in  all  of  our  modes  of  transportation,  it  is  absolutely  critical  that  the  NTSB 
function  in  a  completely  independent  manner  and  stays  above  the  political  fray. 
What  qualities  will  you  bring  to  the  board  that  will  aid  in  the  effectiveness  of  its 
mission? 

Answer.  I  fully  understand  the  importance  of  the  NTSB’s  independence  in  con-
ducting  accident  investigations.  That  independence  has  given  the  NTSB  the  credi-
bility  and  reputation  it  now  holds  around  the  world.  I  see  from  my  preliminary  re-
search  that  Congress  ensured  this  independence  by  separating  the  NTSB  from  the 
Department of Transportation in 1975. I believe the judgment of Congress was cor-
rect in taking that step. 

My  experience  with  independent  safety  investigations  began  in  the  Air  Force, 
when  I  was  associated  with  the  tragic  accident  in  which  four  Air  Force  Thunder-
birds  pilots  were  killed  in  a  training  accident  near  Nellis  Air  Force  Base  in  1982. 
I  was  then  a  member  of  that  flying  team,  and  learned  full  well  not  to  jump  to  con-
clusions, not to make premature statements, and the importance of an investigative 
body  maintaining  its  professional  objectivity  throughout  the  course  of  an  accident 
safety  investigation.  I  firmly  believe  that  independence,  objectivity,  and  precision 
are  paramount  attributes  of  effective  accident  investigations.  Thus,  the  qualities 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

17

that  I  bring  to  the  Board  that  will  help  me  contribute  to  the  effectiveness  of  the 
NTSB  team  and  its  mission  include  more  than  my  experiences  with  flying  oper-
ations  and  transportation  enterprises.  They  also  include  my  personal  experiences 
with the tragic consequences of things going wrong—and the importance of a proper 
safety investigation in identifying the cause. 

RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY HON. DANIEL K. INOUYE TO

CHARLES E. DORKEY III 

Question 1. What will be your priority mission at the Saint Lawrence Seaway De-

velopment Corporation? 

Answer.  If  confirmed,  my  primary  mission  will  be  to  bring  my  experience  and 
judgment  as  a  public  board  member  to  further  the  mission  of  the  SLSDC,  which  I 
understand to be to operate and maintain the U.S. infrastructure and waters of the 
Seaway while performing trade development activities focused on economic develop-
ment for the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Seaway system.

Question  2.  Do  you  believe  there  are  specific  ways  to  enhance  the  trade  develop-

ment functions of the Great Lakes/St. Lawrence Seaway System? 

Answer.  If  confirmed,  I  will  commit  myself  to  learning  how  best  to  enhance  the 

trade development function consistent with the views of all stakeholders. 

RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY HON. HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON 

TO CHARLES E. DORKEY III 

Question 1. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has been examining the feasibility 
of  spending  billions  of  dollars  to  physically  expand  the  Seaway  in  its  Great  Lakes 
Navigation Study. I strongly believe that such a plan would waste taxpayer dollars 
and  pose  an  unacceptable  threat  to  the  health  of  the  St.  Lawrence  River.  I  have 
been pushing the Corps to complete the current phase of the study and to hold pub-
lic  meetings  in  New  York  and  throughout  the  Great  Lakes  before  any  additional 
study  is  initiated.  Do  you  support  public  hearings  on  the  Great  Lakes  Navigation 
Study and what are your views about Seaway expansion? 

Answer.  As  a  matter  of  good  government,  I  believe  that  it  is  important  to  solicit 
the views of all stakeholders in making decisions. Accordingly, if confirmed, I would 
support public hearings on the Great Lakes Navigation Study. On the merits of the 
issue,  I  will  promise  to  study  carefully  the  issues  of  Seaway  expansion  and  seek  to 
understand the balance between any possible benefit to the public, and the cost and 
potential burden to the public.

Question  2.  The  SLSDC  has  traditionally  worked  primarily  with  the  shipping  in-
dustry,  yet  its  regulations  and  programs  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  communities 
along the St. Lawrence River. I believe that SLSDC should better involve local com-
munities  in  SLSDC  decisionmaking.  Will  you  pledge  to  work  to  increase  the  trans-
parency of the Seaway’s decisionmaking and programs? 

Answer. As I stated in my testimony, ‘‘I have worked as a public member of gov-
ernment entities and corporations, and know how important it is that there be com-
munication  with  all  stakeholders,  that  decisions  affecting  people  and  interests  be 
principled,  explained,  and  transparent,  and  that  the  public  interest  always  comes 
first.’’  If  confirmed  as  a  board  member  of  the  SLSDC,  I  pledge  to  apply  these  basic 
principles.

Question 3. Ballast water discharge from ships transiting the Seaway is the prin-
ciple vector for invasive species introductions into the Great Lakes. Would you sup-
port swift development and implementation of tough ballast water regulations to re-
duce this threat to the ecology of the Great Lakes? 

Answer.  Introduction  of  invasive  species  through  ballast  water  is  a  serious  prob-
lem  that  needs  to  be  resolved.  I  believe  the  SLSDC  should  take  a  pro-active  role 
in  solving  this  problem,  and,  if  confirmed,  I  pledge  to  work  with  Congress,  the  Ad-
ministration and the shipping industry to address this critical issue.

Question  4.  It  looks  as  though  the  proposal  to  privatize  the  Seaway  by  creating 
a  ‘‘bi-national  authority’’  to  manage  the  Seaway  is  again  being  discussed.  Do  you 
support privatizing the Seaway system? 

Answer.  At  this  point,  I  do  not  have  enough  information  to  either  support  or  op-
pose  privatization  of  the  Seaway  system.  The  privatization  of  a  transportation  sys-
tem is a significant undertaking that would require careful study and analysis after 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

input  from  all  relevant  stakeholders.  If  confirmed,  I  pledge  to  work  with  all  stake-
holders to determine the effects of privatization proposals.

18

Æ

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  15:12 Jul 06, 2007 Jkt 034711 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6611 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\34711.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

