NOMINATIONS  TO  THE 

DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 

S.  HRG.  110–1151 

HEARING 

BEFORE THE 

COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, 

SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION 

UNITED STATES SENATE 
ONE  HUNDRED  TENTH  CONGRESS 

SECOND  SESSION 

MAY  1,  2008 

Printed  for  the  use  of  the  Committee  on  Commerce,  Science,  and  Transportation 

( 

75–203 PDF 

WASHINGTON  : 

2012 

U.S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office

Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800

Fax: (202) 512–2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402–0001

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 5011 Sfmt 5011 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

SENATE  COMMITTEE  ON  COMMERCE,  SCIENCE,  AND  TRANSPORTATION 

ONE  HUNDRED  TENTH  CONGRESS 

SECOND  SESSION 

DANIEL  K.  INOUYE,  Hawaii,  Chairman 

JOHN  D.  ROCKEFELLER  IV,  West  Virginia 
JOHN  F.  KERRY,  Massachusetts 
BYRON  L.  DORGAN,  North  Dakota 
BARBARA  BOXER,  California 
BILL  NELSON,  Florida 
MARIA  CANTWELL,  Washington 
FRANK  R.  LAUTENBERG,  New  Jersey 
MARK  PRYOR,  Arkansas 
THOMAS  R.  CARPER,  Delaware 
CLAIRE  MCCASKILL,  Missouri 
AMY  KLOBUCHAR,  Minnesota 

TED  STEVENS,  Alaska,  Vice  Chairman 
JOHN  MCCAIN,  Arizona 
KAY  BAILEY  HUTCHISON,  Texas 
OLYMPIA  J.  SNOWE,  Maine 
GORDON  H.  SMITH,  Oregon 
JOHN  ENSIGN,  Nevada 
JOHN  E.  SUNUNU,  New  Hampshire 
JIM  DEMINT,  South  Carolina 
DAVID  VITTER,  Louisiana 
JOHN  THUNE,  South  Dakota 
ROGER  F.  WICKER,  Mississippi 

MARGARET L.  CUMMISKY,  Democratic  Staff  Director  and  Chief  Counsel 

LILA HARPER HELMS,  Democratic  Deputy  Staff  Director  and  Policy  Director 

CHRISTINE D.  KURTH,  Republican  Staff  Director  and  General  Counsel 

PAUL NAGLE,  Republican  Chief  Counsel 

(II) 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

C O N T E N T S 

Hearing held on May 1, 2008 
Statement of Senator Stevens 
Prepared statements submitted by Senator Stevens: 

.................................................................................
................................................................................

Collins, Hon. Susan M., U.S. Senator from Maine  ........................................
Snowe, Hon. Olympia J., U.S. Senator from Maine 
......................................

WITNESSES 

Brennan,  Dr.  William  J.,  Nominee  to  be  Assistant  Secretary  for  Oceans  and 
Atmosphere, United States Department of Commerce  .....................................
Prepared statement  ..........................................................................................
Biographical information  .................................................................................
Claffee,  Lily  Fu,  Nominee  to  be  General  Counsel,  United  States  Department 
of Commerce  .........................................................................................................
Prepared statement  ..........................................................................................
Biographical information  .................................................................................

Page 
1 
1 

9 
1 

10 
12 
13 

2 
4 
4 

(III) 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

NOMINATIONS  TO  THE 

DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 

THURSDAY,  MAY  1,  2008 

COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION, 

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m. in the Rus-
sell Senate Office Building, Room 253, Hon. Ted Stevens, presiding. 

U.S. SENATE, 

Washington, DC. 

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TED STEVENS, 

U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA 

Senator  STEVENS.  Good  afternoon.  I’m  grateful  to  the  Chairman 
for  asking  me  to  chair  this  hearing  so  that  we  might  have  the  op-
portunity to present these nominations to the floor as soon as pos-
sible. We know the jurisdiction of the Commerce Department is ex-
tensive,  ranging  from  development  of  telecommunications  and  in-
formation policy issues to the state of fisheries and the oceans, and 
the  Department  is  launching  many  challenging  initiatives  in  all  of 
the areas of its expertise, including NOAA. 

I  know  Senator  Snowe  would  like  to  be  here  today.  She’s  asked 
me to pass along her regrets in particular to you, Dr. Brennan. Her 
presence  is  required  at  the  mark-up  of  another  Committee  where 
I  should  be,  also,  but  she’s  asked  the  Chairman  to  introduce  her 
statement in the record and it will be introduced in the record. 

[The prepared statement of Senator Snowe follows:] 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. OLYMPIA J. SNOWE, U.S. SENATOR FROM MAINE 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and let me express my sincere appreciation to you for 
your timely consideration and scheduling of this hearing for the nominee for Assist-
ant Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere. 

Mr.  Chairman,  Vice  Chairman  Stevens,  other  Members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased to introduce and speak on behalf of the President’s nominee to be Assistant 
Secretary  for  Oceans  and  Atmosphere,  Dr.  William  J.  Brennan,  an  individual 
uniquely  suited  to  address  the  vast  array  of  issues  encompassed  by  this  position. 
And I also want to welcome here today his wonderful family—his wife, Heather, and 
their children, William, Tyler, and Hayley. I know this is a proud moment for them 
as well. 

A  scan  of  Dr.  Brennan’s  resume  reads  like  a  wish-list  of  experience  one  would 
hope  to  find  in  a  nominee  for  the  number  two  position  at  NOAA.  He  holds  a  Bach-
elor’s degree in Marine Biology, a Master’s in Marine Affairs, and a Ph.D. in Ecology 
and Environmental Sciences. For eight years, he served as Commissioner of Maine’s 
Department  of  Marine  Resources  during  the  Administration  of  my  husband,  Gov-
ernor  John  McKernan.  And  he  has  worked  for  NOAA  at  both  micro  and  macro  lev-
els—as a marine fisheries scientist early in his career, and most recently as Deputy 
Assistant  Secretary  for  International  Affairs,  and  Acting  Director  of  the  Climate 
Change Science Program. 

(1) 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

2 

His exemplary work in these offices combines with an appreciation for our oceans 
born  of  a  lifetime  spent  along  the  coast  of  Maine.  This  was  never  more  readily  ap-
parent  than  during  his  tenure  as  our  Commissioner  of  Marine  Resources.  Faced 
with  a  declining  budget,  he  still  managed  to  maintain  and  even  enhance  critical 
services, while leveraging support to construct a $10 million state-of-the-art marine 
research facility which has led to vast improvements in the management of Maine’s 
lobster  and  shellfish  industries  and  increased  ocean  literacy  throughout  the  state. 
As  NOAA’s  Director  of  International  Affairs,  Bill  reinvigorated  NOAA’s  inter-
national  programs,  scoring  major  victories  for  U.S.  foreign  policy  through  stronger 
high  seas  fishing  regulations,  prevention  of  the  resumption  of  commercial  whaling, 
and establishment of the Global Earth Observation System of Systems. 

Most  recently,  in  2006,  Bill  took  over  as  Acting  Director  of  the  Climate  Change 
Science  Program,  a  $1.7  billion  undertaking  spanning  thirteen  Federal  agencies.  I 
think  everyone  in  this  room  understands  the  degree  of  difficulty  involved  in  con-
vincing even two branches of the Federal Government to work in tandem. But under 
his  leadership,  the  CCSP  is  on  track  to  issue  sixteen  reports—some  as  much  as  3 
years  past  due—by  the  end  of  the  year,  and  a  comprehensive  Scientific  Assess-
ment—which was last updated in 2000—by the end of this month. 

If  confirmed,  Bill  will  provide  over  thirty  years  of  background  in  marine  science, 
legislative  process,  leadership,  and  oversight  at  a  time  when  NOAA  faces  a  broad 
spectrum of challenges, from implementation of the Magnuson-Stevens Reauthoriza-
tion Act to developing policies for mitigation of and adaptation to the impending im-
pacts  of  global  climate  change.  He  has  a  documented  history  of  implementing  sen-
sible, efficient policies to manage the invaluable resources and incalculable splendor 
of  our  oceans.  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  level  of  service  will  continue  as  Assistant 
Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere. 

Again,  I  want  to  commend  the  Committee  for  holding  this  hearing  and  I  appre-
ciate  your  consideration  of  William  Brennan  for  Assistant  Secretary  of  Commerce 
for Oceans and Atmosphere. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Senator  STEVENS.  And  we’re  pleased  to  have  you  here,  Ms. 
Claffee. So I would like to begin with you, Ms. Claffee, to be nomi-
nated  to  be  the  General  Counsel  of  the  Department  of  Commerce. 

Do you have a statement you wish to make? 

STATEMENT OF LILY FU CLAFFEE, NOMINEE TO BE GENERAL 

COUNSEL, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 
Ms.  CLAFEE.  Thank  you,  Mr.  Vice  Chairman.  I’m  honored  to  ap-
pear  before  you  today  as  the  President’s  nominee  to  serve  as  the 
next  General  Counsel  of  the  United  States  Department  of  Com-
merce. 

I’m grateful for the opportunity that President Bush has given to 
me  to  continue  serving  the  American  people,  and  I  deeply  appre-
ciate the confidence and support shown to me by Secretary Gutier-
rez.  I  also  wish  to  extend  a  sincere  word  of  thanks  to  this  Com-
mittee and to its staff for the courtesies that you have extended me 
throughout this process. 

The  General  Counsel  of  the  Department  of  Commerce  serves  as 
the agency’s chief legal officer, providing legal advice and guidance 
to  the  Secretary  and  other  senior  Commerce  officials  as  they  fur-
ther  the  core  mission  of  the  Department,  namely,  to  serve  the 
American  people  by  helping  to  create  the  right  conditions  for  eco-
nomic growth and expanded opportunity. 

The breadth of the Department’s responsibilities and activities is 
reflected  in  the  complex  legal  environment  within  which  the  De-
partment  must  operate.  Handling  the  wide  range  of  issues  faced 
daily  in  the  Department,  from  regulation  of  international  trade  to 
management  of  marine  fisheries  to  numerous  scientific,  environ-
mental, technological and economic endeavors, is a formidable chal-
lenge but it is one that I welcome. 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

3 

If I’m confirmed by the Senate, I would bring valuable experience 
and knowledge to the position of General Counsel. In my nearly 15 
years of law practice, I’ve had the privilege of serving in a number 
of public and private sector positions, first as a law clerk to a Fed-
eral appellate judge, as an associate, then later as a litigation part-
ner in the global law firm now known as Mayer Brown, LLP, han-
dling complex antitrust matters. 

I was a hiring partner of that firm’s 200-attorney Washington of-
fice. As a Deputy Associate Attorney General at the Department of 
Justice  overseeing  several  major  litigating  components,  and  cur-
rently,  as  the  deputy  general  counsel  of  the  Department  of  the 
Treasury  where,  along  with  the  general  counsel,  I  oversee  a  legal 
division of nearly 2,000 attorneys. 

Each of these positions has helped provide me with the skills and 
experience necessary to lead and manage the work of a large legal 
organization  charged  with  a  vast  array  of  programmatic  respon-
sibilities. 

My  government  service  over  the  last  3  years  in  particular  has 
given  me  broad  exposure  to  the  functioning  of  Federal  agencies, 
their  relationship  with  Congress,  and  the  importance  of  having 
strong and independent Inspectors General. 

Yet  I  know  I  have  much  to  learn  about  the  Commerce  Depart-
ment  and  the  laws  and  regulations  that  govern  its  operations.  As 
I learn, I know I will be well supported by a deep staff of talented 
career  lawyers  and  other  professionals.  I  am  confident  that,  with 
their support, I will be able to perform my duties with the skill and 
professionalism  that  the  President,  the  Members  of  this  Com-
mittee, Secretary Gutierrez and the public expect and deserve. 

In particular, the General Counsel serves no more important role 
than  the  chief  ethics  officer  for  the  Department.  Secretary  Gutier-
rez  has  already  requested  that  during  my  tenure,  I  continue  to 
make this responsibility a top priority of the Department. 

In  conclusion,  let  me  affirm  my  belief  that  stewardship  through 
public  service  is  a  special  privilege  and  responsibility  and  that  it 
is  a  lawyer’s  highest  calling.  Nowhere  have  I  learned  this  lesson 
more  vividly  than  from  my  immigrant  parents  who,  having  left 
their  homes  and  families  behind  in  China  many  decades  ago  in 
search  of  the  American  dream,  felt  a  particular  responsibility  to 
impress  upon  their  American-born  daughter  how  precious  the 
blessings  of  liberty  and  opportunity  are  that  they  found  in  this 
great land. 

They  and  in  particular  my  father,  who  as  a  young  airman  in 
China,  fought  in  the  Second  World  War  with  men  like  the  Chair-
man  and  the  Vice  Chairman  to  preserve  a  heritage  of  freedom, 
keenly understood the importance of service to one’s nation. 

If confirmed, I will commit my utmost ability, integrity and devo-

tion to serving the president and the American people. 

Thank  you  again,  Mr.  Vice  Chairman,  for  the  opportunity  to  ap-
pear before you today and for your consideration of my nomination, 
and  I  would  be  pleased  to  take  any  questions  that  you  may  have. 
[The  prepared  statement  and  biographical  information  of  Ms. 

Claffee follow:] 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

PREPARED STATEMENT OF LILY FU CLAFFEE, NOMINEE TO BE GENERAL COUNSEL, 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 

4 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice Chairman, Members of the Committee, 
I  am  honored  to  appear  before  you  today  as  the  President’s  nominee  to  serve  as 
the  next  General  Counsel  of  the  United  States  Department  of  Commerce.  I  am 
grateful  for  the  opportunity  that  President  Bush  has  given  me  to  continue  serving 
the  American  people,  and  I  deeply  appreciate  the  confidence  and  support  shown  to 
me  by  Secretary  Gutierrez.  I  also  wish  to  extend  a  sincere  word  of  thanks  to  this 
Committee  and  to  its  staff  for  the  courtesies  they  have  extended  to  me  throughout 
this process. 

The General Counsel of the Department of Commerce serves as the agency’s chief 
legal  officer,  providing  legal  advice  and  guidance  to  the  Secretary  and  other  senior 
Commerce  officials  as  they  further  the  core  mission  of  the  Department—namely,  to 
serve  the  American  people  by  helping  to  create  the  right  conditions  for  economic 
growth and expanded opportunity. The breadth of the Department’s responsibilities 
and  activities  is  reflected  in  the  complex  legal  environment  within  which  the  De-
partment must operate. Handling the wide range of issues faced daily in the Depart-
ment—from  regulation  of  international  trade  to  management  of  marine  fisheries  to 
numerous scientific, environmental, technological, and economic endeavors—is a for-
midable challenge, but one that I welcome. 

If  confirmed  by  the  Senate,  I  would  bring  valuable  experience  and  knowledge  to 
the  position  of  General  Counsel.  In  my  nearly  15  years  of  law  practice,  I  have  had 
the privilege of serving in a number of public and private sector positions: as a law 
clerk  to  a  Federal  appellate  judge,  as  litigation  partner  in  the  global  law  firm  now 
known as Mayer Brown LLP handling complex antitrust matters, as hiring partner 
of  that  firm’s  200-attorney  Washington  office,  as  a  Deputy  Associate  Attorney  Gen-
eral  at  the  Department  of  Justice  overseeing  several  major  litigating  components, 
and  currently  as  the  Deputy  General  Counsel  of  the  Department  of  the  Treasury 
where,  along  with  the  General  Counsel,  I  oversee  a  legal  division  of  nearly  2,000 
attorneys. Each of these positions has helped provide me with the skills and experi-
ence  necessary  to  lead  and  manage  the  work  of  a  large  legal  organization  charged 
with a vast array of programmatic responsibilities. My government service over the 
last 3 years in particular has given me broad exposure to the functioning of Federal 
agencies, their relationship with Congress, and the importance of having strong and 
independent Inspectors General. 

Yet I know I have much to learn about the Department, and the laws and regula-
tions  that  govern  its  operations.  As  I  learn,  I  know  I  will  be  well  supported  by  a 
deep  staff  of  talented  career  lawyers  and  other  professionals.  I  am  confident  that, 
with their support, I will perform my duties with the skill and professionalism that 
the  President,  the  Members  of  this  Committee,  Secretary  Gutierrez,  and  the  public 
expect  and  deserve.  In  particular,  the  General  Counsel  serves  no  more  important 
role than as chief ethics lawyer for the Department. Secretary Gutierrez has already 
requested  that,  during  my  tenure,  I  continue  to  make  this  responsibility  a  top  pri-
ority for the Department. 

In  conclusion,  let  me  affirm  my  belief  that  stewardship  through  public  service  is 
a  special  privilege  and  responsibility,  and  that  it  is  a  lawyer’s  highest  calling.  No-
where have I learned this lesson more vividly than from my immigrant parents who, 
having  left  their  homes  and  families  behind  in  China  many  decades  ago  in  search 
of the American dream, felt a particular responsibility to impress upon their Amer-
ican-born  daughter  how  precious  the  blessings  of  liberty  and  opportunity  are  that 
they  found  in  this  great  land.  They,  and  in  particular,  my  father,  who  as  a  young 
airman in China fought in the Second World War with men like the Chairman and 
the Vice Chairman to preserve a heritage of freedom, keenly understood the impor-
tance of service to one’s nation. If confirmed, I will commit my utmost ability, integ-
rity,  and  devotion  to  serving  the  President  and  the  American  people.  Thank  you 
again  for  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today,  and  for  your  consideration  of 
my nomination. 

I would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have. 

A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION 
1. Name (Include any former names or nicknames used): 

Current Name: Lily Fu Claffee 
Former Names: Lily Fu (maiden name) 
Lily Fu Swenson (name during prior marriage) 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

5 

2. Position to which nominated: General Counsel of the United States Department 

of Commerce. 

3. Date of Nomination: April 1, 2008. 
4. Address (List current place of residence and office addresses): 

Residence: Information not released to the public. 
Office:  Deputy  General  Counsel,  United  States  Department  of  the  Treasury, 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, D.C. 20220. 

5. Date and Place of Birth: November 22, 1969; Chicago, Illinois. 
6.  Provide  the  name,  position,  and  place  of  employment  for  your  spouse  (if  mar-
ried)  and  the  names  and  ages  of  your  children  (including  stepchildren  and  children 
by a previous marriage). 

Spouse: Scott Andrew Claffee; Attorney, Mayer Brown LLP, 1909 K Street NW, 
Washington, D.C. 20006. 
Children: None. 

7. List all college and graduate degrees. Provide year and school attended. 

University of Wisconsin—Madison, B.A. (1990) in Philosophy and English 
University of Minnesota Law Center, J.D. (1993) 

8.  List  all  post-undergraduate  employment,  and  highlight  all  management-level 
jobs held and any non-managerial jobs that relate to the position for which you are 
nominated. 

Deputy General Counsel, United States Department of the Treasury, (September 
2006–present). 
Deputy Associate Attorney General, United States Department of Justice, (April 
2005–September 2006). 
Partner, Antitrust and Litigation Practice Groups, Mayer, Brown, Rowe & Maw, 
(January 2003–March 2005) (Hiring Partner, 2004–2005). 
Associate, Mayer, Brown & Platt (1994–2002). 
Judicial Clerk, Judge Michael S. Kanne, United States Court of Appeals for the 
Seventh Circuit (1993–1994). 
Summer Associate, Mayer, Brown & Platt (1992, 1993). 
Summer Associate, Gross & Welch (1991). 

9. Attach a copy of your resume. A copy is attached. 
10.  List  any  advisory,  consultative,  honorary,  or  other  part-time  service  or  posi-
tions with Federal, State, or local governments, other than those listed above, with-
in the last 5 years: None. 

11.  List  all  positions  held  as  an  officer,  director,  trustee,  partner,  proprietor, 
agent, representative, or consultant of any corporation, company, firm, partnership, 
or  other  business,  enterprise,  educational,  or  other  institution  within  the  last  5 
years. 

Partner, Mayer, Brown, Rowe & Maw (January 2003–March 2005). 

12.  Please  list  each  membership  you  have  had  during  the  past  10  years  or  cur-
rently hold with any civic, social, charitable, educational, political, professional, fra-
ternal, benevolent or religious organization, private club, or other membership orga-
nization. Include dates of membership and any positions you have held with any or-
ganization. Please note whether any such club or organization restricts membership 
on the basis of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, age, or handicap. 

Admitted to practice law in the District of Columbia (1996–present) and Illinois 
(1994–present). 
St. Matthew’s Cathedral (approx. 1996–present). 
Old St. Mary’s Catholic Church (approx. 2003–present). 
John Carroll Society (various years since 1996). 
American Enterprise Institute (various years since approx. 2000). 
Heritage Foundation (various years since approx. 2000). 
Federalist Society (various years since 1991). 
Washington Sports Club (various years between approx. 1996 and 2000). 
LA Sports Club DC (various years between approx. 2000 and 2006). 
None  of  these  organizations  restricts  membership  on  the  basis  of  sex,  race, 
color, religion, national origin, age or disability. 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

6 

13.  Have  you  ever  been  a  candidate  for  and/or  held  a  public  office  (elected,  non- 
elected,  or  appointed)?  If  so,  indicate  whether  any  campaign  has  any  outstanding 
debt, the amount, and whether you are personally liable for that debt. 

Deputy General Counsel, United States Department of the Treasury (September 
2006–present) (appointed). 
Deputy Associate Attorney General, United States Department of Justice (April 
2005–September 2006) (appointed). 

14.  Itemize  all  political  contributions  to  any  individual,  campaign  organization, 
political  party,  political  action  committee,  or  similar  entity  of  $500  or  more  for  the 
past  10  years.  Also  list  all  offices  you  have  held  with,  and  services  rendered  to,  a 
state or national political party or election committee during the same period. 

See records of the Federal Election Commission (retained in Committee files). 
15. List all scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, honorary society member-
ships,  military  medals,  and  any  other  special  recognition  for  outstanding  service  or 
achievements. 

Recipient of full tuition scholarships for all 3 years of law school. 
16.  Please  list  each  book,  article,  column,  or  publication  you  have  authored,  indi-
vidually  or  with  others.  Also  list  any  speeches  that  you  have  given  on  topics  rel-
evant  to  the  position  for  which  you  have  been  nominated.  Do  not  attach  copies  of 
these publications unless otherwise instructed. 

Balancing  Antitrust  Issues  And  Intellectual  Property  Rights:  A  Practical  Guide 
For  Biotech/Pharma  Companies  In  Managing  Their  IP  Portfolios,  coauthored 
with Scott P. Perlman, Washington Legal Foundation (2003). 
‘‘High  Crimes  From  Misdemeanors:  The  Collateral  Use  Of  Prior,  Uncounseled 
Misdemeanors  Under  The  Sixth  Amendment,  Baldasar,  And  The  Federal  Sen-
tencing Guidelines,’’ 77 Minn. L. Rev. 165 (1992) 

17.  Please  identify  each  instance  in  which  you  have  testified  orally  or  in  writing 
before  Congress  in  a  governmental  or  non-governmental  capacity  and  specify  the 
date and subject matter of each testimony. 

Presented  oral  and  written  testimony  as  Deputy  Associate  Attorney  General  at 
the  Department  of  Justice  before  the  House  Subcommittee  on  Immigration,  Border 
Security  and  Claims  concerning  Immigration  Removal  Procedures  Implemented  in 
the Aftermath of the September 11 Attacks (June 30, 2005). 

18.  Given  the  current  mission,  major  programs,  and  major  operational  objectives 
of  the  department/agency  to  which  you  have  been  nominated,  what  in  your  back-
ground  or  employment  experience  do  you  believe  affirmatively  qualifies  you  for  ap-
pointment to the position for which you have been nominated, and why do you wish 
to serve in that position? 

The  duties  of  my  prior  three  jobs  have  prepared  me  and  affirmatively  qualify  me 
for  appointment  to  serve  as  the  General  Counsel  of  the  Department  of  Commerce. 
As  Deputy  General  Counsel  of  the  Department  of  the  Treasury,  I  currently  serve 
as the principal assistant to the General Counsel, and am responsible for providing 
legal  and  policy  advice  to  senior  Treasury  officials  as  well  as  overseeing  the  oper-
ation of a 2,000-attorney Legal Division. In this position, I have gained wide-ranging 
experience  in  leading  and  managing  the  work  of  a  large  legal  organization  charged 
with  a  vast  array  of  programmatic  responsibilities  relating  to  the  Federal  Govern-
ment’s stewardship of U.S. economic and financial systems, and United States’ par-
ticipation  in  the  global  economy.  I  have  developed  a  deep  appreciation  of  the  work 
done by the U.S. Government to strengthen national security by promoting economic 
growth  and  stability,  and  ensuring  the  safety,  soundness  and  security  of  U.S.  and 
international financial systems. At the Justice Department, I formulated and imple-
mented  legal  policies  and  programs  pertaining  to  a  wide  range  of  civil  justice  mat-
ters,  and  helped  oversee  the  work  of  several  civil  litigating  divisions,  including  the 
Antitrust and Civil Divisions. At both agencies, I gained valuable experience advis-
ing  and  representing  Federal  agencies  and  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  large  and 
diverse  legal  organizations.  Finally,  prior  to  entering  government,  I  was  a  partner 
in  a  global  law  firm  where  I  practiced  in  the  areas  of  antitrust  and  litigation,  and 
served  as  the  hiring  partner  for  the  firm’s  200-attorney  Washington  office.  In  that 
position, I managed teams of attorneys on numerous complex litigation matters, and 
gained valuable experience in legal recruiting, hiring and retention at various levels 
of  seniority  to  build  a  legal  organization’s  depth  and  strength,  and  to  establish  its 
reputation for excellence in the legal marketplace. 

I  am  truly  grateful  to  have  been  given  the  special  privilege  and  responsibility  of 
serving  the  Departments  of  the  Treasury  and  Justice  for  the  last  3  years.  I  believe 
that public service is a lawyer’s highest calling. If confirmed by the Senate as Gen-

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

7 

eral  Counsel,  I  look  forward  to  providing  quality  legal  services  and  sound  legal  ad-
vice to enhance the Commerce Department’s efforts to fulfill its mission to serve the 
American people. 

19. What do you believe are your responsibilities, if confirmed, to ensure that the 
department/agency  has  proper  management  and  accounting  controls,  and  what  ex-
perience do you have in managing a large organization? 

If confirmed as General Counsel, I will continue to maintain the close working re-
lationships  with  senior  managers  in  the  General  Counsel’s  office  that  were  estab-
lished  by  my  predecessors.  As  the  Department’s  chief  legal  officer,  I  will  exercise 
the  oversight  needed  to  ensure  that  sound,  timely  and  appropriate  legal  advice  is 
provided to support the effectiveness of Commerce programs, and to ensure that the 
organizational  goals  and  objectives  of  the  General  Counsel’s  office  are  achieved.  In 
addition  to  daily  interaction  with  agency  officials  and  with  senior  managers  in  the 
General  Counsel’s  office,  I  will  attend  weekly  Executive  Management  Team  meet-
ings  under  the  direction  of  Secretary  Gutierrez,  conduct  weekly  meetings  of  senior 
managers  in  the  Office  of  the  General  Counsel,  and  hold  formal  performance  re-
views throughout the year. 

Through  close  scrutiny  of  the  Department’s  legal  operations  and  holding  man-
agers  at  all  levels  accountable  for  quality  and  results,  the  Office  of  the  General 
Counsel  will  continue  to  strengthen  all  facets  of  its  operations.  I  am  committed  to 
maintaining the Office’s success as a performance-oriented organization, and to im-
plementing  further  management  reforms  such  as  those  established  by  the  Presi-
dent’s Management Agenda. 

As described in my response to the previous question, I have extensive experience 
in managing large legal organizations. For the last year and half as Deputy General 
Counsel  at  Treasury,  I  have  been  responsible  for  my  office’s  annual  budget  of  $10 
million  (exclusive  of  bureaus),  and  have  overseen  the  work  of  approximately  2,000 
lawyers  in  15  different  legal  offices  that  provide  advice  on  myriad  legal  issues  and 
policy  considerations  affecting  the  Treasury  Department  and  its  diverse  programs. 
I  directly  supervise  the  offices  of  four  Assistant  General  Counsels  and  three  Tax 
Counsel;  through  these  senior  managers,  I  additionally  supervise  ten  bureau  Chief 
or  Legal  Counsels.  As  a  Deputy  Associate  Attorney  General,  I  oversaw  the  work  of 
hundreds of attorneys in a variety of operating components and litigating divisions, 
including the Antitrust and Civil Divisions. 

20.  What  do  you  believe  to  be  the  top  three  challenges  facing  the  department/ 

agency, and why? 

Because  I  am  not  currently  employed  at  the  Commerce  Department,  my  ability 
to  know  of  the  largest  challenges  facing  the  agency  is  limited.  Therefore,  while  I 
cannot provide a comprehensive response at this time based on personal knowledge, 
I have reviewed public materials related to the Department, and have identified the 
following issues as important matters facing the Department: 

Making  the  Transition  to  Digital  Television.  I  understand  that  the  National 
Telecommunications  and  Information  Administration  (NTIA)  must  play  a  cru-
cial  role  in  helping  our  Nation  make  the  transition  from  analog  to  digital  tele-
vision.  Under  the  Digital  Television  Transition  and  Public  Safety  Act  of  2005, 
NTIA  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  managing  several  new  programs,  in-
cluding,  most  notably,  a  grant  program  for  public  safety  interoperable  commu-
nications  and  a  coupon  program  for  television  converter  boxes.  Because  of  the 
national  scope  and  broad  impact  of  these  programs,  one  of  the  Department’s 
highest priorities must be to ensure the success of these critical initiatives. 
Development  and  Acquisition  of  Satellites.  I  understand  that  the  National  Oce-
anic  and  Atmospheric  Administration  (NOAA),  in  collaboration  with  the  Na-
tional  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  (NASA)  and  the  Air  Force,  is  in 
the  process  of  acquiring  certain  next-generation  satellite  systems.  Because  the 
accuracy  of  both  routine  and  severe  weather  forecasts  depends  on  NOAA’s  sat-
ellites, these systems are critically important to public safety and defense oper-
ations. Acquiring satellites is a long and complicated process involving both cut-
ting-edge  technical  issues  and  large  capital  expenditures.  Successful  procure-
ment  of  next-generation  satellites  is  an  important  challenge  facing  the  Depart-
ment. 
Success  and  Accuracy  of  the  2010  Census.  I  understand  that  ensuring  the  suc-
cess  and  accuracy  of  the  2010  census—including  successful  management  of  the 
people,  technology,  testing  and  budgets  involved—is  a  top  priority  of  the  De-
partment.  Every  community  in  the  United  States  is  a  stakeholder  in  the  out-
come  of  the  census.  Integral  to  the  success  of  the  census  is  the  public’s  faith 
in  the  Census  Bureau’s  ability  to  secure  the  information  that  is  collected.  The 
Department must discharge this important Constitutional responsibility by pro-

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

8 

tecting the data that is gathered, implementing the most effective technologies, 
and improving the coverage and efficiency of the upcoming decennial census. 

B. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

1.  Describe  all  financial  arrangements,  deferred  compensation  agreements,  and 
other  continuing  dealings  with  business  associates,  clients,  or  customers.  Please  in-
clude information related to retirement accounts. 

I maintain an interest in a 401(k) savings plan established by my former law firm 
(now  called  Mayer  Brown  LLP).  As  disclosed  in  my  financial  disclosure  form  (see 
SF–278), my account is invested in diversified mutual funds. No contributions have 
been,  or  will  be,  made  to  this  account  after  the  termination  of  my  employment  in 
April 2005. 

2.  Do  you  have  any  commitments  or  agreements,  formal  or  informal,  to  maintain 
employment, affiliation, or practice with any business, association or other organiza-
tion during your appointment? If so, please explain: None. 

3.  Indicate  any  investments,  obligations,  liabilities,  or  other  relationships  which 
could  involve  potential  conflicts  of  interest  in  the  position  to  which  you  have  been 
nominated: See ethics agreement. 

4.  Describe  any  business  relationship,  dealing,  or  financial  transaction  which  you 
have  had  during  the  last  10  years,  whether  for  yourself,  on  behalf  of  a  client,  or 
acting  as  an  agent,  that  could  in  any  way  constitute  or  result  in  a  possible  conflict 
of interest in the position to which you have been nominated: None. 

5. Describe any activity during the past 10 years in which you have been engaged 
for the purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modifica-
tion of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law or public 
policy: None. 

6.  Explain  how  you  will  resolve  any  potential  conflict  of  interest,  including  any 
that  may  be  disclosed  by  your  responses  to  the  above  items:  See  ethics  agreement. 

C. LEGAL MATTERS 

1.  Have  you  ever  been  disciplined  or  cited  for  a  breach  of  ethics  by,  or  been  the 
subject of a complaint to any court, administrative agency, professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other professional group? If so, please explain: No. 

Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any Federal, State, 
or other law enforcement authority of any Federal, State, county, or municipal enti-
ty, other than for a minor traffic offense? If so, please explain: No. 

3.  Have  you  or  any  business  of  which  you  are  or  were  an  officer  ever  been  in-
volved  as  a  party  in  an  administrative  agency  proceeding  or  civil  litigation?  If  so, 
please explain. 

I  was  the  defendant  in  Swenson  v.  Swenson,  D.C.  Superior  Court  No.  3–dr–409, 
an uncontested divorce case. The court entered a mutually-agreed upon order of di-
vorce on March 5, 2003. 

4.  Have  you  ever  been  convicted  (including  pleas  of  guilty  or  nolo  contendere)  of 
any  criminal  violation  other  than  a  minor  traffic  offense?  If  so,  please  explain:  No. 
5.  Have  you  ever  been  accused,  formally  or  informally,  of  sexual  harassment  or 
discrimination  on  the  basis  of  sex,  race,  religion,  or  any  other  basis?  If  so,  please 
explain: No. 

6.  Please  advise  the  Committee  of  any  additional  information,  favorable  or  unfa-
vorable,  which  you  feel  should  be  disclosed  in  connection  with  your  nomination: 
None. 

D. RELATIONSHIP WITH COMMITTEE 

1. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with deadlines for infor-

mation set by Congressional committees? Yes. 

2.  Will  you  ensure  that  your  department/agency  does  whatever  it  can  to  protect 
Congressional  witnesses  and  whistle  blowers  from  reprisal  for  their  testimony  and 
disclosures? Yes. 

3.  Will  you  cooperate  in  providing  the  Committee  with  requested  witnesses,  in-
cluding technical experts and career employees, with firsthand knowledge of matters 
of interest to the Committee? Yes. 

4.  Are  you  willing  to  appear  and  testify  before  any  duly  constituted  committee  of 
the  Congress  on  such  occasions  as  you  may  be  reasonably  requested  to  do  so?  Yes. 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

9 

RESUME OF LILY FU CLAFFEE 

Legal Experience 

United States Department of the Treasury, Washington, D.C., 2006 to date, Dep-

United States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C., 2005–2006, Deputy Asso-

uty General Counsel. 

ciate Attorney General. 

Mayer,  Brown,  Rowe  &  Maw  LLP,  Washington,  D.C.,  1996–2005;  Chicago,  IL, 
1994–1996;  Partner,  Litigation  and  Antitrust  Practice  Groups,  2003–2005;  Hiring 
Partner, 2004–2005. 

The Honorable Michael S. Kanne, United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh 

Circuit, 1993–1994, Judicial Clerk. 
Education 

University of Minnesota Law School, Minneapolis, MN. 

Juris Doctor, cum laude, 1993. 
Managing  Editor,  Minnesota  Law  Review,  1992–1993;  Full  Merit  Scholarship, 
1990–1993; Vice-President, Federalist Society, 1992–1993. 

University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI. 

Bachelor of Arts, with distinction, 1990. 
Philosophy and English Literature. 

Publications 

Balancing Antitrust Issues And Intellectual Property Rights: A Practical Guide For 
Biotech/Pharma Companies In Managing Their IP Portfolios, coauthored with Scott 
P.  Perlman,  Washington  Legal  Foundation  (2003);  ‘‘High  Crimes  From  Mis-
demeanors:  The  Collateral  Use  Of  Prior,  Uncounseled  Misdemeanors  Under  The 
Sixth Amendment, Baldasar, And The Federal Sentencing Guidelines,’’ 77 Minn. L. 
Rev. 165 (1992). 
Personal 

Born in Chicago, IL; November 22, 1969. 
Speak fluent Chinese (Cantonese). 
Admitted to practice in Illinois (1994) and the District of Columbia (1996). 

Senator  STEVENS.  Well,  thank  you  very  much.  I’m  sad  that 
there’s  not  more  members  here  today  for  this,  to  hear  your  state-
ment. There are at least two mark-ups, plus a debate, going on on 
the  Floor.  So  it’s  just  not  possible,  but  I’m  heartwarmed  by  your 
comment  about  your  father  and  look  forward  to  working  with  you. 
Our next witness is Dr. William Brennan, Assistant Secretary for 

Oceans and Atmosphere at the Department of Commerce. 

Mr. Brennan, as I indicated, we’re going to put in the record the 
statement  Senator  Snowe  would  make  if  she  were  here.  No,  Sen-
ator  Collins  would  make,  pardon  me,  Senator  Collins.  I  guess  it’s 
both would make. 

[The prepared statement of Senator Collins follows:] 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. SUSAN M. COLLINS, U.S. SENATOR FROM MAINE 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my privilege today to introduce Dr. William Bren-
nan, the President’s nominee to be the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Oceans 
and Atmosphere. The people of Maine are proud of Dr. Brennan’s distinguished ca-
reer  of  public  service  and  record  of  accomplishment  in  Maine  and  in  Washington. 
Dr. Brennan’s commitment to public service and his extensive experience in envi-
ronmental  science  and  oceans  management  make  him  an  excellent  nominee.  From 
his  start  as  a  merchant  seaman  to  his  experience  as  a  NOAA  fisheries  scientist  to 
his important work as Acting Director of the U.S. Climate Change Science Program, 
Dr. Brennan, if confirmed, will provide strong leadership as Assistant Secretary. 

I  know  this  because  I  had  the  distinct  pleasure  of  serving  with  Dr.  Brennan  in 
Maine in Governor John McKernan’s Cabinet for many years. Dr. Brennan was ap-
pointed to a Cabinet position as the Commissioner of Maine’s Department of Marine 
Resources  in  1987.  I  can  personally  attest  to  Dr.  Brennan’s  dedication  and  skill  in 
managing one of Maine’s most complex natural resources. 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

10 

Prior  to  our  working  together,  Dr.  Brennan  earned  undergraduate  and  graduate 
degrees in marine biology and marine affairs from the University of Maine and the 
University of Rhode Island. He also served on Capitol Hill on the staff of Represent-
ative  John  McKernan,  and  later,  as  I  previously  mentioned,  in  Governor  McKer-
nan’s Cabinet. 

After leaving state government in 1995, Dr. Brennan opened a private consulting 
firm providing guidance on marine and environmental policy to businesses and gov-
ernments.  Over  this  same  period,  he  was  appointed  to  an  academic  chair  position 
and  lectured  on  ocean  governance  and  resource  management  at  the  Corning  School 
of  Ocean  Studies  at  the  Maine  Maritime  Academy.  Dr.  Brennan  later  went  on  to 
receive  his  Ph.D.  in  ecology  and  environmental  sciences  from  the  University  of 
Maine. 

Having  served  as  the  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  Commerce  for  International 
Affairs since 2002, Dr. Brennan well understands the challenges facing the position 
of  Assistant  Administrator  at  NOAA.  His  management  of  the  U.S.  Climate  Change 
Science  Program,  which  coordinates  and  integrates  scientific  research  on  climate 
change  across  13  Federal  agencies,  also  lends  itself  well  to  the  skills  needed  to  ad-
dress the particular challenges associated with this position. 

From  NOAA’s  development  and  acquisition  of  geostationary  and  polar  weather 
and  climate  satellite  systems,  to  advancing  the  Agency’s  mission  to  educate  society 
about  the  importance  of  climate  change  science  and  research,  to  the  successful  im-
plementation of the Magnuson Stevens Act amendments, Dr. Brennan is well-suited 
to successfully carry out the duties of the Assistant Secretary position. 

Mr. Chairman, I strongly endorse William Brennan’s nomination to be the Assist-
ant  Secretary  of  Commerce  for  Oceans  and  Atmosphere  and  enthusiastically  rec-
ommend him to this Committee. 

STATEMENT OF DR. WILLIAM J. BRENNAN, NOMINEE TO BE 

ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 

Dr.  BRENNAN.  Thank  you  very  much,  sir.  Mr.  Vice  Chairman,  I 
am honored to appear before you today as the President’s nominee 
to be the next Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and At-
mosphere. 

I’m  grateful  and  honored  that  the  President  has  given  me  this 
opportunity  to  continue  serving  the  American  people,  and  I  am 
deeply  appreciative  of  the  confidence  and  support  that  has  been 
shown 
in  me  by  Secretary  Gutierrez  and  Under  Secretary 
Lautenbacher. 

I  would  like  to  thank  this  Committee  and  particularly  its  staff 
for  the  courtesies  they  have  extended  to  me  throughout  this  proc-
ess. 

Mr. Vice Chairman, I would not be here today were it not for my 
family  and  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  them.  Their  support  and 
encouragement has sustained me over the years and I wish to rec-
ognize  and  thank  my  wife  Heather  and  daughter  Hayley  who  are 
here with me today and my sons Will and Tyler who could not join 
us but are with me in spirit. 

Let me begin, Mr. Vice Chairman, by stating my strong commit-
ment  to  the  core  mission  of  the  department;  namely,  to  serve  the 
American  people  by  helping  to  create  the  right  conditions  for  eco-
nomic growth and expanded opportunity. 

The  Commerce  Department  and  the  National  Oceanic  and  At-
mospheric  Administration  address  a  wide  range  of  important  chal-
lenges each and every day. Our work takes place on a global basis, 
from  marine  fisheries  and  the  Weather  Service  to  other  numerous 
scientific, environmental, technological and economic endeavors. 

The  department’s  Assistant  Secretary  for  Oceans  and  Atmos-
phere  serves  as  NOAA’s  deputy  administrator,  helping  to  oversee 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

11 

its  12,500  employees  and  $4  billion  budget.  Indeed,  one  of  the  as-
sistant secretary’s important roles is to serve as the NOAA Admin-
istrator’s  primary  advisor  and  surrogate  and  as  an  advocate  for 
NOAA’s  programs  and  the  development  of  the  president’s  budget. 
With  the  support  of  this  Committee  and  the  hard-working  men 
and  women  of  NOAA,  I  am  confident  I  can  maintain  the  high 
standards  set  by  my  predecessors  and  support  Secretary 
Gutierrez’s commitment to excellence. 

If  confirmed  by  the  Senate,  I  would  bring  valuable  experience 
and  knowledge  to  the  Office  of  Assistant  Secretary  for  Oceans  and 
Atmosphere. For the past 6 years, I have served as the Deputy As-
sistant  Secretary  for  International  Affairs,  providing  vision  and 
strategic  management  of  NOAA’s  $100  million  international  pro-
gram and special projects related to weather and water, ecosystem 
and  marine  resource  management,  commerce  and  transportation 
and climate services. 

For the past 2 years, I have also served in an acting capacity as 
the Director of the Climate Change Science Program, managing the 
interagency  effort  that  integrates  the  planning  of  and  $2  billion 
budget  for  Federal  climate  and  global  change  activities  of  13  Fed-
eral scientific agencies. 

I  began  my  career  in  the  Merchant  Marine  and  as  a  commercial 
fisherman. Through that experience, I realized a love of the ocean, 
of the things that live in it and are supported by it, and in the rig-
ors of a life associated with making a living from it. 

In  the  three  decades  since  I  took  my  first  job  with  NOAA  as  a 
GS–5  technician  at  the  National  Marine  Fisheries  Service  Labora-
tory  in  Woods  Hole,  Massachusetts,  I  have  dedicated  myself  to  en-
vironment  and  natural  resource  stewardship.  I  have  served  as  a 
legislative assistant in the U.S. House of Representatives, working 
on fisheries and environmental issues. 

I  have  been  a  cabinet  officer,  heading  the  State  of  Maine’s  De-
partment of Marine Resources. I have worked in the private sector 
providing  environmental  policy  advice  to  public  and  private  sector 
clients, and I have been a college professor, teaching and mentoring 
students  in  the  field  of  ocean  governance  and  resource  manage-
ment. 

Over the years, I have been in and out of government as an em-
ployee  of  NOAA,  a  NOAA  contractor,  a  NOAA  partner  during  my 
time as a member of the New England Fishery Management Coun-
cil, and as a customer of NOAA when I was a state cabinet official. 
For  the  last  several  years,  I’ve  been  part  of  NOAA’s  senior  lead-
ership  and  I  have  been  privileged  to  help  Vice  Admiral 
Lautenbacher  work  to  transform  the  agency  into  a  cohesive  enter-
prise. 

In  these  varied  roles,  I  believe  I  have  developed  the  skills  and 
experience  necessary  to  address  the  challenges  and  opportunities 
facing NOAA. I also recognize that I have much to learn about fac-
ets  of  the  agency  that  I  have  not  worked  with  on  a  regular  basis. 
As I look forward to this continued education, I know that I will 
be  well  supported  by  the  talented  staff  and  employees  and  other 
professionals within NOAA. I am confident that with their support, 
I will perform my duties with the skill and professionalism that the 
public expects and deserves. 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

12 

If  confirmed,  there  would  be  no  more  significant  honor  and  cap-
stone  to  my  career  than  to  serve  as  the  Deputy  Administrator  of 
NOAA, and let me conclude by stating that it is my firm conviction 
that  stewardship  through  public  service  is  a  special  privilege  and 
responsibility. 

If confirmed, I will commit my utmost energies, integrity and de-

votion to serving the American people. 

I  want  to  thank  you  again  for  the  opportunity  to  appear  before 
you  today  and  for  your  consideration  of  my  nomination.  I  stand 
ready to answer your questions, sir. 

[The  prepared  statement  and  biographical  information  of  Dr. 

Brennan follow:] 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF DR.  WILLIAM J.  BRENNAN,  NOMINEE TO BE ASSISTANT 
SECRETARY FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE,  UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF 
COMMERCE 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice Chairman, Members of the Committee, 
I am honored to appear before you today as the President’s nominee to be the next 
Assistant  Secretary  of  Commerce  for  Oceans  and  Atmosphere.  I  am  grateful  and 
honored  that  the  President  has  given  me  this  opportunity  to  continue  serving  the 
American people, and I am deeply appreciative of the confidence and support shown 
to  me  by  Secretary  Gutierrez  and  Under  Secretary  Lautenbacher.  I  would  also  like 
to  thank  this  Committee  and  its  staff  for  the  courtesies  they  have  extended  to  me 
throughout this process. 

Mr.  Chairman,  I  would  not  be  here  today  were  it  not  for  my  family  and  I  would 
like to acknowledge them—their support and encouragement has sustained me over 
the years and I wish to recognize and thank my wife Heather and daughter Hayley 
who  are  with  me  today  and  my  sons  Will  and  Tyler  who  could  not  join  us  but  who 
are with me in spirit. 

Let me begin by stating my strong commitment to the core mission of the Depart-
ment, namely, to serve the American people by helping to create the right conditions 
for economic growth and expanded opportunity. The Commerce Department and the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) address a wide range of 
important challenges each and every day. Our work takes place on a global basis— 
from marine fisheries and the weather service to other numerous scientific, environ-
mental, technological, and economic endeavors. 

The  Department’s  Assistant  Secretary  for  Oceans  and  Atmosphere  serves  as 
NOAA’s  Deputy  Administrator,  helping  to  oversee  its  12,500  employees  and  $4  bil-
lion  budget.  Indeed,  one  of  the  Assistant  Secretary’s  important  roles  is  to  serve  as 
the  NOAA  Administrator’s  primary  advisor  and  surrogate  and  as  an  advocate  for 
NOAA’s  programs  in  the  development  of  the  President’s  budget.  With  the  support 
of  this  Committee,  and  the  hardworking  men  and  women  of  the  NOAA,  I  am  con-
fident  I  can  maintain  the  high  standards  set  by  my  predecessors  and  support  Sec-
retary Gutierrez’s commitment to excellence. 

If  confirmed  by  the  Senate,  I  would  bring  valuable  experience  and  knowledge  to 
the  office  of  Assistant  Secretary  for  Oceans  and  Atmosphere.  For  the  past  6  years, 
I have served as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Affairs—providing 
vision and strategic management of NOAA’s $100 million international program and 
special projects related to weather and water, ecosystem and marine resource man-
agement,  commerce  and  transportation,  and  climate  services.  For  two  of  the  past 
6  years  I  have  also  served  in  an  acting  capacity  as  the  Director  of  the  Climate 
Change Science Program, managing the interagency effort that integrates the plan-
ning  of  and  $2  billion  budget  for  Federal  climate  and  global  change  activities  of  13 
Federal scientific agencies. 

I  began  my  career  in  the  Merchant  Marine  and  as  a  commercial  fisherman. 
Through  that  experience,  I  realized  a  love  of  the  ocean,  of  the  things  that  live  in 
it and are supported by it, and in the rigors of a life associated with making a living 
from it. In the three decades since I took my first job with NOAA as a GS–5 techni-
cian at the National Marine Fisheries Service laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachu-
setts,  I  have  dedicated  myself  to  environment  and  natural  resource  stewardship.  I 
have served as a Legislative Assistant in the U.S. House of Representatives working 
on  fisheries  and  environmental  issues.  I  have  been  a  Cabinet  Officer  heading  the 
State of Maine’s Department of Marine Resources. I have worked in the private sec-

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

13 

tor  providing  environmental  policy  advice  to  private  and  public  sector  clients.  And, 
I  have  been  a  college  professor,  teaching  and  mentoring  students  in  the  field  of 
ocean governance and resource management. 

Over  the  years,  I  have  been  in  and  out  of  government  as  an  employee  of  NOAA, 
a NOAA contractor, a NOAA partner during my time as a member of the New Eng-
land Fishery Management Council, and as a customer of NOAA when I was a state 
cabinet official. For the last several years, I have been part of NOAA’s senior leader-
ship and I have been privileged to help VADM Lautenbacher work to transform the 
agency  into  a  cohesive  enterprise.  In  these  varied  roles,  I  believe  I  have  developed 
the skills and experience necessary to address the challenges and opportunities fac-
ing  NOAA.  I  also  recognize  that  I  have  much  to  learn  about  facets  of  the  Agency 
that I have not worked with on a regular basis. As I look forward to this continued 
education,  I  know  that  I  will  be  well  supported  by  the  deep  and  talented  staff  of 
career  employees  and  other  professionals  within  NOAA.  I  am  confident  that,  with 
their  support,  I  will  perform  my  duties  with  the  skill  and  professionalism  that  the 
public, expects and deserve. 

If confirmed, there would be no more significant honor and capstone to my career 
than to serve as the Deputy Administrator of NOAA and let me conclude by stating 
that  it  is  my  firm  conviction  that  stewardship  through  public  service  is  a  special 
privilege  and  responsibility.  If  confirmed,  I  will  commit  my  utmost  energies,  integ-
rity,  and  devotion  to  serving  the  American  people.  Thank  you  again  for  the  oppor-
tunity to appear before you today, and for your consideration of my nomination. 

I would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have for me. 

A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION 

1. Name (Include any former names or nicknames used): William Joseph Brennan 

(Bill). 

Atmosphere. 

2. Position to which nominated: Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and 

3. Date of Nomination: January 22, 2008. 
4. Address (List current place of residence and office addresses): 

Residence: Information not released to the public. 
Office:  United  States  Department  of  Commerce,  1401  Constitution  Ave,  N.W., 
Room 6224, Washington, D.C. 20230. 

5. Date and Place of Birth: 12/02/1951; Rhode Island. 
6.  Provide  the  name,  position,  and  place  of  employment  for  your  spouse  (if  mar-
ried)  and  the  names  and  ages  of  your  children  (including  stepchildren  and  children 
by a previous marriage). 

Heather  Russell  Brennan  (spouse);  children:  William  Russell  Brennan—24; 
Tyler Mackintosh Brennan—22; Hayley Julia Brennan—19. 

7. List all college and graduate degrees. Provide year and school attended. 

University of Maine, B.S., 1977. 
University of Rhode Island, M.A., 1985. 
University of Maine, Ph.D., 2002. 

8.  List  all  post-undergraduate  employment,  and  highlight  all  management-  level 
jobs held and any non-managerial jobs that relate to the position for which you are 
nominated. 

6/2006–Present; Director, U.S. Climate Change Science Program (Acting), (Man-
agement level). 
6/2002–Present;  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  Commerce  for  International  Af-
fairs, (Management level). 
9/1999–2002;  Professor,  Corning  School  of  Ocean  Studies,  Maine  Maritime 
Academy, (Management level). 
1995–2002; Consultant, W.J. Brennan Associates, (Management level). 
1987–1995;  Commissioner,  Maine  Department  of  Marine  Resources,  (Manage-
ment level). 
1983–1987;  Senior  Legislative  Assistant,  U.S.  House  of  Representatives,  (Man-
agement level). 
1982–1983;  Consultant,  Atlantic  Offshore  Fishermen’s  Association,  (Non-mana-
gerial). 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

1977–1982; Marine technician and scientist, National Marine Fisheries Service, 
(Non-managerial). 

14 

9. Attach a copy of your resume. A copy is attached. 
10.  List  any  advisory,  consultative,  honorary,  or  other  part-time  service  or  posi-
tions with Federal, State, or local governments, other than those listed above, with-
in the last 5 years: None. 

11.  List  all  positions  held  as  an  officer,  director,  trustee,  partner,  proprietor, 
agent, representative, or consultant of any corporation, company, firm, partnership, 
or  other  business,  enterprise,  educational,  or  other  institution  within  the  last  5 
years: None. 

ability). 

12.  Please  list  each  membership  you  have  had  during  the  past  10  years  or  cur-
rently hold with any civic, social, charitable, educational, political, professional, fra-
ternal, benevolent or religious organization, private club, or other membership orga-
nization. Include dates of membership and any positions you have held with any or-
ganization. Please note whether any such club or organization, restricts membership 
on the basis of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, age, or handicap: None. 

13.  Have  you  ever  been  a  candidate  for  and/or  held  a  public  office  (elected,  non- 
elected,  or  appointed)?  If  so,  indicate  whether  any  campaign  has  any  outstanding 
debt, the amount, and whether you are personally liable for that debt. 

Deputy Assistant Secretary of Commerce (2002—present) (No debt or personal li-

14.  Itemize  all  political  contributions  to  any  individual,  campaign  organization, 
political  party,  political  action  committee,  or  similar  entity  of  $500  or  more  for  the 
past  10  years.  Also  list  all  offices  you  have  held  with,  and  services  rendered  to,  a 
state or national political party or election committee during the same period: None. 
15. List all scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, honorary society member-
ships,  military  medals,  and  any  other  special  recognition  for  outstanding  service  or 
achievements: None. 

16.  Please  list  each  book,  article,  column,  or  publication  you  have  authored,  indi-
vidually  or  with  others.  Also  list  any  speeches  that  you  have  given  on  topics  rel-
evant  to  the  position  for  which  you  have  been  nominated.  Do  not  attach  copies  of 
these publications unless otherwise instructed. 

November  5,  2002,  Climate  Change  and  Utilization  of  Marine  Resources:  The 
Importance  of  Enhancing  the  Global  Climate  Observing  System,  10th  Anniver-
sary Conference of the Marine Institute of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. 
February  3,  2003,  U.S.  Efforts  for  Sustainable  Fisheries,  The  Norwegian  Re-
search & Technology Forum in the U.S./Canada, Washington, D.C. 
June  11,  2003,  Exploring  Our  Oceans—The  International  Perspective,  Capitol 
Hill Oceans Week Symposium, Washington, D.C. 
July  14,  2003,  Association  of  Marine  Laboratories  of  the  Caribbean,  31st  Sci-
entific Meeting, Port of Spain, Trinidad. 
August 21, 2003, Developing Countries and the Restoration of Large Marine Eco-
systems, UNIDO Symposium, Vienna, Austria. 
November  12,  2003,  U.S.  Implementation  of  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  De-
velopment  Commitments,  Global  Conference  on  Oceans,  Coasts  and  Islands, 
Paris, France. 
December  4,  2003,  U.S.  Activities  on  Climate  Change,  9th  Conference  of  the 
UNFCCC Parties, Milan, Italy. 
January 28, 2004, International Perspectives on Coordination of Earth Observa-
tion Activities, Toronto, Canada. 
May 3, 2004, U.S. Commitments to World Summit Goals for Sustainable Devel-
opment, Fourth World Fisheries Congress, Vancouver, Canada. 
June  2,  2004,  GISD:  Employing  Earth  Observations  for  the  Benefit  of  Human-
kind,  Geographic  Information  for  Sustainable  Development  Implementation 
Workshop, Washington, D.C. 
June  8,  2004,  Keynote  Address,  30th  Commemorative  Meeting,  Poland-U.S. 
Joint Cooperative Fisheries, Narragansett, RI. 
October  5,  2004,  The  International  Effort  to  Coordinate  Earth  Observation  Ac-
tivities, International Astronautical Congress, Vancouver, Canada. 
June  6,  2005,  Moving  Toward  a  Global  All  Hazards  Warning  System,  Asia  Pa-
cific Tsunami and All Hazards Workshop, Honolulu, HI. 
November  21,  2005,  GEOSS:  Serving  Society  from  Tsunami  to  Multi-Hazard, 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, Rome, Italy. 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

15 

March 28, 2006, Global Earth Observation System of Systems, International Air 
Show, Santiago, Chile. 
May  11,  2006,  NOAA’s  Role  in  International  Science  Partnerships,  National 
Science Board, Washington, D.C. 
July  13,  2006,  Law,  Science  and  Ocean  Management,  30th  Virginia  Law  of  the 
Sea Conference, Dublin, Ireland. 
April 26, 2007, Climate Change in the Northwest Atlantic, Center for Law & In-
novation, Portland, Maine. 
June  5,  2007,  Keynote  Address,  24th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  North  Atlantic 
Salmon Conservation Organization, Bar Harbor, Maine. 

17.  Please  identify  each  instance  in  which  you  have  testified  orally  or  in  writing 
before  Congress  in  a  governmental  or  non-governmental  capacity  and  specify  the 
date and subject matter of each testimony. 

February  7,  2007,  Oversight  Hearing,  Climate  Change  Research  and  Scientific 
Integrity, Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, U.S. Senate. 

18.  Given  the  current  mission,  major  programs,  and  major  operational  objectives 
of  the  department/agency  to  which  you  have  been  nominated,  what  in  your  back-
ground  or  employment  experience  do  you  believe  affirmatively  qualifies  you  for  ap-
pointment to the position for which you have been nominated, and why do you wish 
to serve in that position? 

I have dedicated myself to environment and natural resource stewardship. I began 
my  career  more  than  30  years  ago  with  NOAA  Fisheries  at  its  Woods  Hole  labora-
tory  after  working  in  the  commercial  fisheries  and  the  merchant  marine.  Over  the 
years, I have worked in both the legislative and executive branches at both the state 
and Federal level and have been in and out of government as an employee of NOAA, 
a NOAA contractor, a NOAA partner during my time as a member of the New Eng-
land Fishery Management Council, and as a customer of NOAA when I was a state 
cabinet  official  heading  the  Maine  Department  of  Marine  Resources.  For  the  last 
several years, I have been part of the NOAA senior leadership and have been privi-
leged to help VADM Lautenbacher transform the agency into a well managed cohe-
sive enterprise. I can think of no more significant honor and cap stone to my career 
than to serve as the number two NOAA official and I believe my 30 years of experi-
ence with NOAA affirmatively qualifies me for appointment to this position. 

19.What  do  you  believe  are  your  responsibilities,  if  confirmed,  to  ensure  that  the 
department/agency  has  proper  management  and  accounting  controls,  and  what  ex-
perience do you have in managing a large organization? 

If confirmed as Assistant Secretary, I will work closely with NOAA Administrator 
Lautenbacher,  NOAA’s  Executive  Management  Council,  NOAA’s  Chief  Operating 
Officer,  and  NOAA’s  Line  Office  Assistant  Administrators  to  exercise  the  oversight 
necessary  to  ensure  that  NOAA  programs  are  effective  and  that  NOAA’s  organiza-
tional  goals  and  objectives  are  achieved.  I  will  continue  to  advance  the  reforms  es-
tablished  by  Administrator  Lautenbacher  associated  with  planning,  programming, 
budgeting  and  execution.  And  I  will  be  a  strong  advocate,  with  the  Department, 
OMB and the Congress to ensure NOAA has the resources necessary to accomplish 
its mission. 

I  have  extensive  experience  managing  a  large  organization.  As  acting  Director  of 
the  U.S.  Climate  Change  Science  Program,  I  have  provided  leadership  and  vision 
for  a  $1.8  billion  program  integrating  Federal  climate  and  global  change  activities 
of  13  Federal  agencies  and  White  House  offices.  During  my  time  as  Deputy  Assist-
ant  Secretary  for  International  Affairs,  I  have  been  responsible  for  the  strategic 
management  and  organizational  restructuring  of  a  $100  million  international  pro-
gram. And, as the secretary of a cabinet-level state agency, I have managed a com-
plex  and  diverse  program  of  research,  enforcement,  development,  marketing,  moni-
toring, and education. 

20.What do you believe to be the top three challenges facing the department/agen-

cy, and why? 

Development  and  acquisition  of  satellites.  NOAA  is  in  the  process  of  acquiring  its 
next generation geostationary and polar satellite systems. These systems are crucial 
to  our  nation’s  ability  to  forecast  weather  and  vital  to  public  safety  and  to  our  na-
tion’s  military.  For  the  next  generation  polar  satellite  program,  NOAA  along  with 
its interagency partners, the USAF and NASA, has experienced significant technical 
and  management  challenges,  while  the  next  generation  geostationary  satellite  pro-
gram has just transitioned from the design to the acquisition phase. These are very 
complicated  and  extremely  expensive  systems,  requiring  long  lead  times  to  ensure 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

16 

continuity of data and information, making this one of NOAA’s most important chal-
lenges. 

Global change science and research. NOAA is charged with helping society under-
stand,  plan  for,  and  respond  to  climate  variability  and  change.  This  is  achieved 
through  the  development  and  delivery  of  climate  information  services,  the  imple-
mentation  of  a  global  observing  system,  and  focused  research  and  modeling  to  un-
derstand  key  climate  processes.  The  NOAA  climate  mission  is  focused  on  providing 
a  predictive  understanding  of  the  global  climate  system  so  the  public  can  incor-
porate the information and products into their decisions. 

NOAA  meets  user  demands  for  climate  information  and  decision  support  by  pro-
viding data, summaries, and forecasts, underpinned by a vigorous research program. 
In  recent  years,  users  have  voiced  a  growing  concern  about  the  impacts  of  climate 
change. These demands are growing and require unbiased climate information at in-
creasingly finer resolution scales. A key challenge for NOAA is to enhance its ability 
to  meet  these  demands  by  continuing  strong  science  and  observations  programs 
while consolidating information sources into a homogeneous distribution portal, pro-
viding  more  variables,  fidelity,  and  resolution  to  its  climate  products  and  informa-
tion services. 

Implementation  of  Magnuson  Stevens  Act  Amendments.  The  recent  reauthoriza-
tion of the Magnuson Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act was a sig-
nificant  achievement  for  both  Congress  and  the  Administration,  made  possible  by 
the  leadership  of  Chairman  Inouye  and  Vice-Chairman  Stevens.  The  Act  provided 
NOAA with several new authorizations, including the need to end overfishing imme-
diately and combat Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported fishing. Fully implementing 
the  amendment  present  challenges,  both  domestically  and  internationally,  and 
NOAA  is  presently  working  to  develop  regulations  to  implement  the  provisions  of 
the Act and is actively engaged within the Regional Fishery Management Organiza-
tion fora to bring about the necessary changes. 

B. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

1.  Describe  all  financial  arrangements,  deferred  compensation  agreements,  and 
other  continuing  dealings  with  business  associates,  clients,  or  customers.  Please  in-
clude information related to retirement accounts: None. 

2.  Do  you  have  any  commitments  or  agreements,  formal  or  informal,  to  maintain 
employment, affiliation, or practice with any business, association or other organiza-
tion during your appointment? If so, please explain: None. 

3.  Indicate  any  investments,  obligations,  liabilities,  or  other  relationships  which 
could  involve  potential  conflicts  of  interest  in  the  position  to  which  you  have  been 
nominated: See ethics agreement. 

4.  Describe  any  business  relationship,  dealing,  or  financial  transaction  which  you 
have  had  during  the  last  10  years,  whether  for  yourself,  on  behalf  of  a  client,  or 
acting  as  an  agent,  that  could  in  any  way  constitute  or  result  in  a  possible  conflict 
of interest in the position to which you have been nominated: None. 

5. Describe any activity during the past 10 years in which you have been engaged 
for the purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modifica-
tion of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law or public 
policy: None. 

6.  Explain  how  you  will  resolve  any  potential  conflict  of  interest,  including  any 
that  may  be  disclosed  by  your  responses  to  the  above  items:  See  ethics  agreement. 

C. LEGAL MATTERS 

1.  Have  you  ever  been  disciplined  or  cited  for  a  breach  of  ethics  by,  or  been  the 
subject of a complaint to any court, administrative agency, professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other professional group? If so, please explain: No. 

2.  Have  you  ever  been  investigated,  arrested,  charged,  or  held  by  any  Federal, 
State,  or  other  law  enforcement  authority  of  any  Federal,  State,  county,  or  munic-
ipal entity, other than for a minor traffic offense? If so, please explain: No. 

3.  Have  you  or  any  business  of  which  you  are  or  were  an  officer  ever  been  in-
volved  as  a  party  in  an  administrative  agency  proceeding  or  civil  litigation?  If  so, 
please explain: No. 

4.  Have  you  ever  been  convicted  (including  pleas  of  guilty  or  nolo  contendere)  of 
any  criminal  violation  other  than  a  minor  traffic  offense?  If  so,  please  explain:  No. 
5.  Have  you  ever  been  accused,  formally  or  informally,  of  sexual  harassment  or 
discrimination  on  the  basis  of  sex,  race,  religion,  or  any  other  basis?  If  so,  please 
explain: No. 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

17 

6.  Please  advise  the  Committee  of  any  additional  information,  favorable  or  unfa-
vorable,  which  you  feel  should  be  disclosed  in  connection  with  your  nomination: 
None. 

D. RELATIONSHIP WITH COMMITTEE 

1. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with deadlines for infor-

mation set by Congressional committees? Yes. 

2.  Will  you  ensure  that  your  department/agency  does  whatever  it  can  to  protect 
Congressional  witnesses  and  whistle  blowers  from  reprisal  for  their  testimony  and 
disclosures? Yes. 

3.  Will  you  cooperate  in  providing  the  Committee  with  requested  witnesses,  in-
cluding technical experts and career employees, with firsthand knowledge of matters 
of interest to the Committee? Yes. 

4.  Are  you  willing  to  appear  and  testify  before  any  duly  constituted  committee  of 
the  Congress  on  such  occasions  as  you  may  be  reasonably  requested  to  do  so?  Yes. 

RESUME OF DR. WILLIAM JOSEPH BRENNAN 

Experience 

6/2006–Present, Director, U.S. Climate Change Science Program (Acting). 

Direct  the  interagency  program  that  coordinates  and  integrates  scientific  re-
search on changes in climate and related systems. The Climate Change Science 
Program  is  composed  of  13  Federal  scientific  agencies  and  integrates  the  plan-
ning  of  and  $2  billion  budget  for  Federal  climate  and  global  change  activities. 
6/2002–Present,  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  Commerce  for  International  Af-

fairs. 

Direct the international activities of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-
ministration  (NOAA)  and  its  subsidiary  branches;  Weather  Service,  Fisheries 
Service, Ocean Service, Satellite and Data Information Service, and Oceanic and 
Atmospheric  Research  in  support  of  a  $100  million  program  related  to  weather 
and  water,  ecosystem  and  marine  resource  management,  commerce  and  trans-
portation, and climate services. 

9/1999–2002,  Professor,  Corning  School  of  Ocean  Studies,  Maine  Maritime  Acad-

emy. 

Appointed  to  academic  chair  as  lecturer  in  the  field  of  ocean  governance  and 
resource  management.  Managed  a  research  grant  program  and  conducted  spe-
cial projects for the President in program and curriculum development. 

1995–2002, Consultant, W.J. Brennan Associates. 

Principal  in  consulting  firm  providing  policy  and  strategic  planning  advice  to 
private and public sector domestic and international clients with a focus on fish-
eries, marine, and environmental affairs. 

1987–1995, Commissioner, Maine Department of Marine Resources. 

Cabinet  officer  in  administration  of  Governor  John  R.  McKernan,  Jr.  and  chief 
executive  officer  of  state  agency  engaged  in  fisheries  and  marine  research,  en-
forcement,  development,  marketing,  monitoring,  and  education.  State  resource 
management representative in regional, national, and international fora. 

1983–1987, Senior Legislative Assistant, U.S. House of Representatives. 

Managed  legislative  activities  in  office  of  Congressman  John  McKernan,  Jr. 
with professional focus in the areas of fisheries, environment, merchant marine, 
transportation, and energy. 

1982–1983, Consultant, Atlantic Offshore Fishermen’s Association. 

Grant  writing  and  research  proposal  development  for  New  England-wide  com-
mercial fishing organization. 

1977–1982, Marine Scientist, National Marine Fisheries Service. 

Positions  of  increasing  levels  of  responsibility  within  the  field  of  fisheries  and 
environmental  research  at  the  Woods  Hole,  MA;  Narragansett,  RI;  and  Sandy 
Hook, NJ research stations. 

Education 

Ph.D., University of Maine, May 2002 (Ecology & Environmental Sciences). 
M.A., University of Rhode Island, 1985 (Marine Affairs). 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

B.S., University of Maine, 1977 (Marine Biology). 

18 

Senator STEVENS. Thank you. I wish there had been more people 

here to have heard your statement. 

As  one  who  sort  of  is  involved  with  the  oceans,  also,  I  welcome 
your  experience  and  your  know-how  to  this  position  in  NOAA.  We 
look  forward  to  working  with  you  and  I  will  recommend  to  the 
Chairman that we try to have a meeting of the Committee and re-
port  these  nominations  out  so  they  might  be  confirmed  just  as 
quickly as possible. 

Thank you very much. Thank you, both. 
Ms. CLAFFEE. Thank you, sir. 
Dr. BRENNAN. Thank you. 
[Whereupon, at 2:42 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.] 

Æ 

VerDate Nov 24 2008  10:32 Jul 24, 2012 Jkt 052754 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6611 S:\GPO\DOCS\75203.TXT SCOM1 PsN: JACKIE

