9-1-1  AND  VoIP

S.  HRG.  109–690

FIELD  HEARING

BEFORE THE 

COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, 

SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION 

UNITED STATES SENATE 
ONE  HUNDRED  NINTH  CONGRESS

FIRST  SESSION

SEPTEMBER  1,  2005

Printed  for  the  use  of  the  Committee  on  Commerce,  Science,  and  Transportation

(

30–555

WASHINGTON  : 

2006

U.S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office

Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800

Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 5011 Sfmt 5011 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

SENATE  COMMITTEE  ON  COMMERCE,  SCIENCE,  AND  TRANSPORTATION 

TED  STEVENS,  Alaska,  Chairman 

JOHN  MCCAIN,  Arizona 
CONRAD  BURNS,  Montana 
TRENT  LOTT,  Mississippi 
KAY  BAILEY  HUTCHISON,  Texas 
OLYMPIA  J.  SNOWE,  Maine 
GORDON  H.  SMITH,  Oregon 
JOHN  ENSIGN,  Nevada 
GEORGE  ALLEN,  Virginia 
JOHN  E.  SUNUNU,  New  Hampshire 
JIM  DEMINT,  South  Carolina 
DAVID  VITTER,  Louisiana 

DANIEL  K.  INOUYE,  Hawaii,  Co-Chairman 
JOHN  D.  ROCKEFELLER  IV,  West  Virginia 
JOHN  F.  KERRY,  Massachusetts 
BYRON  L.  DORGAN,  North  Dakota 
BARBARA  BOXER,  California 
BILL  NELSON,  Florida 
MARIA  CANTWELL,  Washington 
FRANK  R.  LAUTENBERG,  New  Jersey 
E.  BENJAMIN  NELSON,  Nebraska 
MARK  PRYOR,  Arkansas 

LISA J.  SUTHERLAND,  Republican  Staff  Director 

CHRISTINE DRAGER KURTH,  Republican  Deputy  Staff  Director 

DAVID RUSSELL,  Republican  Chief  Counsel 

MARGARET L.  CUMMISKY,  Democratic  Staff  Director  and  Chief  Counsel 

SAMUEL E.  WHITEHORN,  Democratic  Deputy  Staff  Director  and  General  Counsel 

LILA HARPER HELMS,  Democratic  Policy  Director 

(II)

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

C O N T E N T S 

Opening Statement of Hon. Conrad Burns, U.S. Senator from Montana ...........
Statement  of  David  Jones,  President,  National  Emergency  Number  Associa-
tion (NENA) ..........................................................................................................
Statement of Jeffrey Citron, Chairman and CEO, Vonage ..................................
Statement  of  Wanda  McCarley,  President-Elect  of  the  Association  of  Public-
Safety Communications Officials-International (APCO) ..................................
Statement of Greg Rohde, Executive Director, E–911 Institute ..........................
Statement of George Heinrichs, President and CEO, Intrado .............................
Statement  of  Janet  Kelly,  Director,  Department  of  Administration,  State  of 
Montana ................................................................................................................
Statement of Jeremy Ferkin, General Manager, CenturyTel, Inc. ......................
Statement of William Squires, Sr. Vice President and General Counsel, Black-
foot Telecommunications Group ..........................................................................
Statement  of  Greg  Jergeson,  Chairman,  Public  Service  Commission  of  Mon-
tana .......................................................................................................................

Page 
1 

3 
10 

13 
16 
22

29
32

36

39 

(III)

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

9-1-1  AND  VOIP 

THURSDAY,  SEPTEMBER  1,  2005 

COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND 

U.S. SENATE, 

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:30 p.m. at the Great 

Falls Civic Center, Hon. Conrad Burns, presiding. 

TRANSPORTATION, 

Great Falls, MT. 

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CONRAD BURNS,

U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA 

Senator  BURNS.  We’ll  call  the  Committee  to  order,  and  this  is  a 
Committee  of  one  today,  I  see.  If  I’ve  got  the  vote,  we’ll  go  ahead 
and pass this bill, and let’s do away with the hearings. 

But  we  want  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  field  hearing  on  Voice 
Over  IP  and  E–911.  We  thank  you  for  coming  today.  It’s  nice  to 
have  this,  and  a  lot  of  our  friends  to  be  welcome  to  the  Big  Sky 
Country.  This  is  really  the  last  best  place,  and  we  don’t  need  any-
one  out  here  in  the  state  to  tell  us  so,  or  should  we  try  to  control 
our  words  and  the  way  we  feel  about  Montana.  I  think  I  might 
need to place a call to the Copyright Office once I go back to Wash-
ington,  however.  We’re  arguing  over,  ‘‘The  last  best  place.’’  I  don’t 
think it’s going to go inside the beltway. 

It’s not often that we get to do official business, Senate business 
here in Montana, but when we do, I’m always glad to welcome folks 
from  around  the  state  to  take  part.  I  find  the  people  have  a  lot 
more sense outside the beltway, and Washington D.C. continues to 
be  one  of  the  logic-free  zones  of  the  country.  So  I  welcome  all  of 
the  people  from  Great  Falls  and  around  the  state  who  are  here 
today, and I’d also like to thank the city of Great Falls for making 
this great facility available to us today for this hearing. 

Today’s  hearing  is  on  a  subject  near  and  dear  to  me,  emergency 
communication  systems  to  first  responders,  making  sure  that  they 
have access to the latest technologies that they need: 9-1-1 and en-
hanced  9-1-1  system  in  Voice  Over  Internet  Protocol  Services.  We 
call that VoIP, Voice Over Internet. 

That’s  quite  a  mouthful  in  itself.  But  it  only  describes  the  latest 
challenge in what is truly a simple and necessary matter of public 
policy,  that  our  Nation’s  communications  infrastructure,  as  it 
moves forward with technological change and new business models, 
must  incorporate  universal  access  to  9-1-1  and  emergency  services 
as it does. 

A few years ago, with this important goal in mind, we set up the 
Congressional  E–911  Caucus,  which  takes  a  leading  role  in  identi-

(1)

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

2

fying  issues  of  pressing  concern  to  public  safety  and  the  commu-
nity,  and  helping  us  in  Congress  to  understand  what  needs  to  be 
done,  and  what  should  be  done  to  ensure  that  the  9-1-1  system  is 
up to date, and responsive as it needs to be. 

New technologies such as Voice Over IP are beneficial to telecom 
carriers, businesses, and consumers alike. My philosophy is that we 
should not do anything in Congress that would harm or impede the 
deployment of beneficial technologies. 

But  at  the  same  time,  it  is  clearly  in  the  public  interest  for  the 
Nation’s  emergency  response  infrastructure,  including  over  6,000 
Public  Safety  Access  Points,  or  PSAPs  as  we  call  them,  to  be  in-
cluded in the technological advances. And although they clearly un-
derstand the need to move forward, the PSAPs do not always have 
the  resources  or  incentives  to  move  quite  as  quickly  as  the  private 
sector does. I think we in Congress can help all the affected stake-
holders to achieve that common goal. 

With  that  in  mind,  we  worked  on  the  ENHANCE  9-1-1  Act, 
which  the  President  signed  into  law  last  December,  that  will  pro-
vide  matching  grants  to  PSAPs  that  upgrade  their  system  to  re-
ceive  enhanced  9-1-1  data  from  mobile  phones,  which  is  the  loca-
tion  and  the  number  of  the  caller,  so  that  first  responders  can  get 
to  them  the  same  way  they  get  to  the  addresses  of  the  landline 
callers, or the hard wire, as we call them. I hope to get full funding 
for that program this year. 

But today we are here to talk about VoIP, and its services, what 
the best way might be for them to include 9-1-1 and E–911 in their 
services.  Voice  Over  Internet  Protocol  services  are  growing  dra-
matically.  There  are  currently  over  three  million  Voice  Over  IP 
subscribers  in  the  United  States,  with  over  25  million  expected  in 
the  next  five  years.  I  hope  we’re  closer  to  that  number  than  when 
we  estimated  cell  phone  users  in  2000  when  we  passed  the  1996 
Act. 

But we know that those services are minimally intrusive for pro-
viders and ensure subscribers that they have access to 9-1-1 service 
as they expect when they dial their phone. 

It’s  important  that  we  move  quickly.  There  are  a  few  well  pub-
licized  cases  of  people  actually  dying  earlier  this  year  when  they 
dialed  9-1-1  from  a  VoIP  phone,  and  could  not  get  through  to  9-1-
1  call  centers.  That  kind  of  thing  is  shocking.  It  is  also  unaccept-
able. 

With  these  stories  in  mind,  last  May  the  FCC  issued  an  order 
making 9-1-1 and E–911 mandatory for VoIP providers, and requir-
ing  that  incumbent  Bell  providers  make  access  to  the  9-1-1  infra-
structure available to those companies. 

In  Congress  on  the  same  day,  we  introduced  bills  in  the  House 
and  the  Senate  to  do  basically  the  same  thing.  I’m  the  sponsor  of 
the  Senate  bill,  and  would  like  to  thank  my  fellow  Senators,  Bill 
Nelson  of  Florida,  and  Hillary  Clinton  of  New  York,  both  Demo-
crats, for their leadership as well on this issue. Public safety is not 
a  partisan  issue,  and  I’m  proud  to  work  across  the  aisle  with 
Democrats  if  it  will  help  save  lives  of  Americans  all  across  this 
country. 

I  understand  Senator  Nelson  has  inserted  a  statement  in  the 
record, and we’re going to accept that by unanimous consent. So or-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

3

dered. But being as he couldn’t be here today, and there’s good rea-
son for that. So I would like to make note of that. 

So  I  look  forward  to  hearing  testimony  today  on  the  state  of  9-
1-1  and  VoIP  services  in  general,  the  FCC  order,  and  the  bill  that 
we  will  have  before  the  Senate.  I  hope  each  one  of  you  is  going  to 
tell us what the FCC order does right, and what it does wrong, and 
how  the  bill  might  be  improved  to  fix  some  of  the  things  that  are 
especially difficult for companies to do. 

I know you won’t be shy in telling me what the problems are, but 
you  should  also  be  aware  that  this  is  a  problem  which  we  need  to 
fix, and fix it very soon. So I look to you for your expertise in how 
we accomplish this great job. 

Now, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to welcome to the table 
today  our  witnesses,  and  then  we  will  start  the  dialogue.  First  of 
all,  we  have  David  Jones,  president  of  NENA—and  thank  you, 
David,  for  your  kind  words  today—Jerry  Citron  of  Vonage,  co-
founder,  and  Chairman,  and  CEO;  Wanda  McCarley,  APCO;  and 
Greg Rohde, of course, you heard from today on E–911; and George 
Henry, CEO and Chairman of the Board of Intrado. So we welcome 
all  of  these  folks.  And  David,  we’ll  start  off  with  you.  Thank  you 
for coming today.

STATEMENT OF DAVID JONES, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL 

EMERGENCY NUMBER ASSOCIATION (NENA) 

Mr.  JONES.  Thank  you,  Senator  Burns.  Thank  you  for  providing 
me the opportunity to appear before you today. Again, my name is 
David Jones, and I currently serve Spartanburg, South Carolina as 
the  Director  of  Emergency  Services.  I’m  also  the  President  of  the 
National  Emergency  Number  Association,  an  organization  con-
sisting of more than 7,000 members in 46 chapters across the U.S. 
and Canada. Additionally, I serve as the Vice Chair of the Federal 
Communications  Commission’s  Intergovernmental  Advisory  Com-
mittee  representing  the  interests  of  local  government  and  public 
safety. 

Senator,  I  applaud  your  leadership,  as  well  as  that  of  your  col-
leagues and staff, in bringing the 9-1-1 community to the table for 
these vital discussions about the future of public safety communica-
tions. The 9-1-1 community has known no greater friend than you, 
Senator, and we sincerely thank you for your continued leadership 
that you have provided on 9-1-1 issues over the years. 

I’m here today to testify in support of the IP-Enabled Voice Com-
munications  in  Public  Safety  Act  of  2005.  We  applaud  the  recent 
actions  taken  by  the  FCC  in  adopting  its  order  on  E–911  require-
ments  for  IP  enabled  service  providers,  but  NENA  believes  Con-
gressional  action  in  this  area  is  needed  as  well.  As  legislation  to 
update our communications law is drafted, NENA encourages Con-
gress  to  include  provisions  that  address  critical  9-1-1  and  public 
safety concerns. The IP Enabled Voice Communications and Public 
Safety Act provides a foundation for such action. 

As  9-1-1  in  emergency  communications  continues  to  advance,  it 
is critical that communications regulation evolve in a parallel fash-
ion,  and  is  flexible  enough  to  accommodate  future  advancements 
that  have  yet  to  be  considered.  Today  IP  is  where  we  were  with 
wireless  some  ten  years  ago,  and  industry  and  technology  are  ad-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

4

vancing  at  a  rapid  rate  with  unlimited  promise,  facing  the  chal-
lenge,  and  regulatory  requirement  to  provide  E–911  to  all  cus-
tomers. 

Even  today,  though,  after  more  than  ten  years  of  discussion  and 
debate,  wireless  E–911  is  available  in  less  than  50  percent  of  the 
PSAPs  in  the  U.S.  We  must  not  allow  history  to  repeat  itself  with 
Voice Over IP. 

Last  June  I  testified  before  this  Committee  supporting  the  need 
for  targeted  Federal  regulation  for  E–911  and  VoIP,  suggesting 
that  this  would  most  appropriately  be  handled  by  the  FCC.  Since 
then,  the  Commission  has  acted,  and  we  applaud  their  leadership. 
Now  we  must  work  together  at  all  levels  of  government  and  with 
industry  to  plan  for  a  nationally  standardized  and  coordinated  ap-
proach to deployment of Voice Over IP E–911. 

Too often in the past we have tried to draft new laws and regula-
tions for 9-1-1 requirements for innovative technologies as they are 
introduced,  including  wireless  VoIP.  In  recognition  of  this  issue 
earlier  this  month,  NENA  joined  APCO  and  several  other  groups 
in  a  letter  asking  Congress  to  include  a  clear  statement  on  the  ju-
risdiction of the FCC to establish rules requiring providers of inter-
connected  voice  telecommunications  services  to  provide  their  cus-
tomers with E–911 capabilities. 

We  certainly  agree  that  this  is  an  important  topic  to  consider, 
given  today’s  9-1-1  system,  but  NENA  asks  Congress  to  go  a  step 
further. NENA believes that regardless of the service classification, 
telecommunications information, or otherwise, if a service provides 
a  communications  capability,  in  which  a  customer  can  reasonably 
expect to be able to reach a public safety answering point when di-
aling 9-1-1, whenever the PSTN, an IP network, or some other yet 
to be identified path, the FCC should have the clear regulatory au-
thority to address the 9-1-1 aspects of these services. 

This  is  not  to  suggest  that  the  FCC  should  enact  regulation  to 
cover all potential service types, but the FCC should have sufficient 
authority  if  regulation  is  deemed  necessary.  Congress  does  not 
have  to  continually  go  back  and  update  laws  based  on  every  new 
communications technology or service that need 9-1-1 access. 

Therefore,  we  support  the  provisions  in  the  IP-Enabled  Voice 
Communication  and  Public  Safety  Act  that  authorizes  the  FCC  to 
regulate  in  the  area  of  IP-enabled  voice  communications,  but  we 
ask  Congress  to  extend  that  authority  to  any  service  that  provides 
a  communications  capability  in  which  a  customer  can  reasonably 
expect to reach a PSAP when dialing 9-1-1. 

Funding  for  IP-enabled  9-1-1  services  in  the  development  of  the 
next  generation  9-1-1  systems  is  perhaps  most  important  issue  of 
9-1-1 today. The public safety community is extremely concerned by 
the  need  and  growing  impact  of  VoIP  on  the  loss  of  conventional 
service  fees  and  surcharge  revenue,  and  the  uncertainties  of  any 
requirement  to  replace  that  critical  operational  funding  stream  in 
the VoIP environment. 

Thus, in addition to establishing clear FCC regulatory authority, 
it  is  essential  that  Congress  do  nothing  to  compromise  state  and 
local  authority  to  impose  and  collect  9-1-1  fees  on  all  services 
where  a  customer  has  a  reasonable  expectation  of  being  connected 
to  9-1-1,  again,  regardless  of  the  type  of  technology.  As  technology 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

5

evolves,  the  classification  of  service  or  technology  type  should  not 
have  an  effect  on  the  ability  of  state  and  local  government  to  ad-
dress those issues. 

Congress  should  also  consider  ways  to  facilitate  state  and  local 
funding  of  critical  9-1-1  emergency  communications  systems.  Last 
year  Congress  effectively  acted  in  this  regard  by  passing  the  EN-
HANCE  9-1-1  Act  of  2004,  and  authorizing  up  to  $250  million  per 
year in grants for 9-1-1 system upgrades. However to date, no mon-
ies  have  been  appropriated  to  fund  such  a  grant.  NENA  implores 
Congress  to  fund  the  ENHANCE  9-1-1  Act  of  2004.  The  continued 
success  and  sustainability  of  our  9-1-1  system  will  greatly  benefit 
from such action. 

The  IP-Enabled  Voice  Communications  and  Safety  Act  of  2005 
requires each entity with ownership or control of a 9-1-1 infrastruc-
ture, known commonly as 9-1-1 system service providers, to provide 
requesting  IP-enabled  service  providers  access  to  the  equipment, 
databases,  network,  and  other  necessary  capabilities  on  a  non-dis-
criminatory basis. The bill also provides immunity from liability to 
the same extent as provided to local telephone exchange companies 
for providers of IP-enabled 9-1-1 service. 

Additionally,  the  bill  provides  liability  protection  to  the  users  of 
such services, as well as liability protection for PSAPs to the same 
extent they currently have for non-IP-enabled service. 

On  the  issue  of  liability  parity,  the  bill  mirrors  the  language 
granted  to  wireless  carriers,  users  of  wireless  service,  and  PSAPs 
that is contained in the Wireless Communications Act of 1999. 

It is important to note that the Wireless Act of 1999 was passed 
before the widespread deployment of Phase I and II, an action that 
was  deemed  critical  and  applauded  by  both  the  9-1-1  community 
and industry. 

NENA believes it is also important to have liability parity for IP-
enabled  services  enacted  into  the  law  before  the  quickly  approach-
ing 120-day VoIP E–911 deadline of November 28th. 

Past  experience  in  the  deployment  of  E–911  has  shown  that  a 
lack of legal clarity on important topics, such as liability parity and 
nondiscriminatory  access  to  E–911  capability,  can  lead  to  a  delay 
in the provision of E–911 service. 

Therefore,  NENA  wholeheartedly  supports  the  provisions,  as  we 
believe they are essential to ensure the timely deployment of E–911 
for IP-enabled services. 

Finally,  NENA  believes  that  planning  now  for  the  future  9-1-1 
system is of paramount importance, and fully supports Section 3 of 
the  IP-Enabled  Voice  Communications  Act.  We  hope  the  telecom 
reform will be done this year, and include the important 9-1-1 pro-
vision identified in my testimony. 

However,  past  experience  has  shown  this  type  of  reform  can  be-
come  bogged  down  in  negotiations,  and  take  longer  than  expected 
to  complete.  Should  this  happen,  NENA  believes  it  is  very  impor-
tant  that  the  9-1-1  provisions  discussed  here  be  included  in  the 
stand-alone  bill,  such  as  a  slightly  modified  version  of  the  IP-En-
abled Voice Communication Act, and considered by Congress before 
the session ends this year. 

To  conclude,  NENA  fully  supports  each  of  the  provisions  in  this 
act as they pertain to VoIP 9-1-1, but asks Congress to broaden the 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

6

scope  of  the  bill  to  include  any  service  that  provides  communica-
tions capability in which a customer can reasonably expect to reach 
a PSAP when dialing 9-1-1. Thank you. 

[The prepared statement of Mr. Jones follows:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF DAVID F. JONES, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL EMERGENCY 

NUMBER ASSOCIATION (NENA) 

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, thank you very much for providing 
me  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today.  My  name  is  David  Jones  and  I’m 
a  nationally  certified  Emergency  Number  Professional  (ENP),  serving  Spartanburg 
County, South Carolina as the Director of Emergency Services. 

I’m  also  the  President  of  the  National  Emergency  Number  Association  (NENA), 
an  organization  consisting  of  more  than  7,000  members  in  46  chapters  across  the 
U.S.  and  Canada  representing  public  officials,  fire,  EMS,  law  enforcement,  equip-
ment  and  service  providing  vendors  of  the  9-1-1  community.  Additionally,  I  serve 
as the Vice Chair of the Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) Intergovern-
mental  Advisory  Committee  (IAC),  representing  the  interests  of  local  government 
and public safety. I am also a longtime member of the Association for Public Safety 
Communications Officials (APCO) International. 

Today  I  appear  before  the  Committee  on  behalf  of  NENA,  but  also  standing  on 
the shoulders of the thousands of 9-1-1 professionals in America who work tirelessly 
to  help  those  people  who  dial  9-1-1  in  times  of  need.  Admirable  colleagues,  like 
those  on  my  team  in  Spartanburg,  who  continue  to  find  ways  to  get  the  job  done 
regardless of the technical obstacles or challenges of modern communications in our 
Public  Safety  Answering  Point  (PSAP).  National  leadership,  like  that  of  Senators 
Burns and Clinton, as well as Representatives Shimkus and Eshoo, co-chairs of the 
Congressional  E–911  Caucus.  I  thank  all  of  you  for  your  tireless  work  to  make  our 
9-1-1 system work like it should. 
Opening Comments 

Mr.  Chairman,  I  applaud  your  leadership,  as  well  as  that  of  your  colleagues  and 
staff  in  bringing  the  9-1-1  community  to  the  table  for  these  vital  discussions  about 
the  future  of  public  safety  communications.  The  9-1-1  Community  has  known  no 
greater  friend  than  Senator  Conrad  Burns.  I  sincerely  thank  you  for  the  continued 
leadership  you  have  provided  on  9-1-1  issues  over  the  years.  NENA  represents  the 
national  9-1-1  community  as  the  ‘‘Voice  of  9-1-1’’,  but  if  there  is  truly  one  voice  of 
9-1-1 in the halls of Congress, surely it is Senator Conrad Burns. 

In the late 1990’s, Senator Burns led an effort to recognize ‘9-1-1’ as the universal 
number for emergency calling and to ensure the deployment of wireless E–911. En-
acted  by  Congress,  ‘‘The  Wireless  Communications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of  1999’’ 
is our foundation for greater 9-1-1 policy goals. 

Building off of the success of that legislation, Senator Burns helped found the E–
911 Caucus, along with fellow co-chairs Senator Hillary Clinton, Congressman John 
Shimkus  and  Congresswoman  Anna  Eshoo,  a  group  whose  leadership  on  9-1-1 
issues has been unparalleled. Most recently Senator Burns, along with the other E–
911  Caucus  co-chairs,  successfully  led  the  charge  to  pass  the  ENHANCE  911  Act 
of  2004.  Signed  into  law  by  President  Bush  on  December  23,  2004,  the  ENHANCE 
911  Act  authorized  the  creation  of  a  national  9-1-1  Implementation  and  Coordina-
tion  (ICO)  office  and  up  to  $250  million  per  year  for  grants  to  upgrade  enhanced 
emergency communications services. This was monumental legislation for 9-1-1 and 
I  thank  Senator  Burns  and  the  E–911  Caucus  co-chairs  for  their  efforts  this  year 
to secure an appropriation to fund the provisions in that law. 

Thank you Senator Burns, and fellow E–911 Caucus co-chairs, for your continued 

leadership and support of 9-1-1. 

I am here today to testify in support of the IP-Enabled Voice Communications and 
Public  Safety  Act  of  2005.  We  applaud  the  recent  actions  taken  by  the  FCC  in 
adopting  its  Order  on  E–911  requirements  for  IP-enabled  service  providers,  but 
NENA  believes  Congressional  action  in  this  area  is  needed  as  well.  We  appreciate 
the  need  to  enact  communications  legislation  that  encourages  innovation  and  the 
widespread deployment of broadband service which we believe will not only provide 
benefits  to  the  general  public,  but  will  also  have  an  enormous  positive  impact  on 
public  safety  communications.  As  legislation  to  update  our  communications  laws  is 
drafted,  NENA  encourages  Congress  to  include  provisions  that  address  critical
9-1-1 and public safety concerns focusing on today’s needs and taking into consider-
ation the progression towards the next generation 9-1-1 and emergency services sys-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

7

tem. The IP-Enabled Voice Communications and Public Safety Act provides a foun-
dation for such action. 

In my statement today, I will refer to our vision, our needs and respectfully make 
recommendations to improve the legislation before the Committee, emphasizing fun-
damental points for NENA, 9-1-1 and IP-enabled services. 
The Changing Landscape of 9-1-1

Since its inception, the 9-1-1 system has been THE first responder in times of in-
dividual and mass emergencies. Every day, Americans call 9-1-1 at the time of their 
greatest need. Today we are averaging over 200 million 9-1-1 calls per year. Ninety-
six  percent  of  the  Nation’s  geography  is  covered  by  at  least  some  basic
9-1-1; ninety-nine percent of the American public has access to 9-1-1. For the caller 
and the public, the successful completion of a 9-1-1 call can mean the difference be-
tween danger and security, injury and recovery, or life and death. The ability to call 
for help in times of an emergency is not ‘voluntary’—it’s mandatory. 

Yet  the  advancement  of  communications  and  network  technology  is  quickly  blur-
ring  the  lines  of  familiarity  in  the  world  of  emergency  communications  and  9-1-1. 
No  longer  can  we  discuss  9-1-1  solely  in  the  context  of  the  public  switch  telephone 
network  (PSTN).  No  longer  can  we  discuss  the  routing  of  9-1-1  calls  as  being  de-
pendent  on  the  use  of  the  existing  analog,  circuit  switched  telephone  network.  In 
fact,  just  last  week  NENA  introduced  for  public  comment  its  first  ever  VoIP  9-1-
1  standard.  NENA  started  with  ‘‘One  nation—One  number’’,  and  now  we  add,  ‘‘any 
device,  from  anywhere,  at  anytime.’’  As  9-1-1  and  emergency  communications  con-
tinue  to  advance,  it  is  critical  that  communications  regulation  evolves  in  a  parallel 
fashion  and  is  flexible  enough  to  accommodate  future  advancements  that  have  yet 
to be considered. 

Truly  the  future  is  happening  now.  Already,  over  fifty  million  Americans  are 
using some form of broadband Internet access offering exciting new communications 
possibilities.  Voice  over  IP  is  coming.  In  many  places  it’s  already  here.  IP-enabled 
services are dynamic, competitive, innovative and most of all, an opportunity to im-
prove  all  of  our  communications  systems.  Better,  faster,  cheaper  technology  and 
communications  service  is  vital  to  American  consumers  and  business,  but  it  may 
prove even more vital for our public safety and security. 

With our excitement for IP-enabled services comes some trepidation. Today, IP is 
where  we  were  with  wireless  ten  years  ago;  an  industry  and  technology  advancing 
at a rapid rate with unlimited promise facing the challenge, and regulatory require-
ment,  to  provide  E–911  to  all  customers.  Even  today,  after  more  than  ten  years  of 
discussion  and  debate,  wireless  E–911  is  available  in  less  than  fifty  percent  of  the 
PSAPs  in  the  United  States.  We  must  not  allow  history  to  repeat  itself  with  VoIP. 
It  is  critical  that  all  parties,  public  and  private,  come  together  in  the  spirit  of  co-
operation,  collaboration  and  good  faith,  to  plan  a  national  deployment  for  VoIP.  To 
make this happen will require a good deal of leadership at all levels of government, 
starting with the United States Congress. 
National Plan for 9-1-1 and IP-Enabled Communications Services 

Last June I testified before this Committee supporting the need for targeted Fed-
eral  regulation  for  E–911  and  VoIP,  suggesting  that  this  would  most  appropriately 
be handled by the FCC. Since then the Commission has acted and we applaud their 
leadership. Now we must work together at all levels of government and with indus-
try  to  plan  for  a  nationally  standardized  and  coordinated  approach  to  the  deploy-
ment of VoIP E–911. 

To  be  effective  and  meaningful,  E–911  must  be  included  in  a  wide  range  of  VoIP 
and  IP-enabled  products  and  services.  This  includes  both  voice  and  data,  whether 
serving  a  fixed  location,  or  nomadic  locations  that  may  change  from  day  to  day,  or 
operating wirelessly in a much greater area over Wi-Fi or Wi-Max networks for ex-
ample. Each of these service types offers different challenges. 

The  technical  development  of  9-1-1  must  be  convergent  with  its  policy  direction. 
Today’s  regulations  for  9-1-1  are  fragmented,  consisting  of  a  jurisdictional  patch-
work  of  rules  for  various  types  of  communications,  providers  and  stakeholders 
Wireline  issues  are  regulated  by  states.  Wireless  issues  are  regulated  by  the  FCC. 
9-1-1  public  safety  answering  points  are  often  local.  Consumer  expectations  are  na-
tional. VoIP can be international. 

9-1-1  needs  to  be  treated  as  an  integrated  public  safety  service,  part  of  a  larger 
whole  for  our  safety  and  national  security.  This  concept  has  been  recently  tested 
with  the  deployment  of  wireless  E–911.  Through  this  process,  we’ve  learned  some 
important lessons in implementing new technologies with E–911 systems: (1) E–911 
must  be  treated  as  an  inter-dependent  overall  system;  (2)  coordination  is  very  im-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

8

portant; (3) Federal leadership is necessary for national implementation and resolu-
tion of issues. 

In  our  experience,  voluntary  consensus  development,  within  reasonable  time-
frames,  of  requirements  and  rules  for  technology  and  service  integration  provides 
the best results. To enable a coordinated national deployment of VoIP it is very im-
portant that Congress and the FCC provide directive influence to encourage the de-
velopment  of  national  standards  and  require  the  early  adoption  of  recognized  na-
tional  standards  when  they  become  available.  Federal  rules  and  regulations  should 
provide reasonable guidelines to enable a path forward but should allow the appro-
priate  standards  processes  to  determine  the  specific  methodologies  to  meet  such 
guidelines. In doing so, the FCC and Congress will contribute needed leadership to-
ward  the  facilitation  of  a  nationally-coordinated  effort  in  delivering  IP-enabled  E–
911 service. 

NENA  strongly  encourages  both  the  FCC  and  Congress  to  work  closely  with  the 
joint  NHTSA/NTIA  national  9-1-1  Implementation  and  Coordination  Office  once  es-
tablished. We believe the ICO should manage all 9-1-1 specific functions at the Fed-
eral  level.  The  ICO  is  uniquely  positioned  to  coordinate  and  provide  guidance  to 
multiple ongoing 9-1-1 efforts at the national, state and local level. This will ensure 
that individual efforts are not occurring in a void and are not duplicated or at cross 
purposes. 
Regulatory Authority 

Too  often  in  the  past  we  have  tried  to  draft  new  laws  and  regulations  for  E–911 
requirements  for  innovative  technologies  as  they  are  introduced,  including  wireless 
and  VoIP.  Recognizing  this  issue,  earlier  this  month  NENA  joined  APCO  and  sev-
eral  other  groups  in  a  letter  asking  Congress  to  include  a  clear  statement  in  any 
telecom  reform  language  on  the  jurisdiction  of  the  FCC  to  establish  rules  requiring 
providers  of  interconnected  voice  telecommunications  services  to  provide  their  cus-
tomers with E–911 capabilities. 

We  certainly  agree  that  this  is  an  important  topic  to  consider  given  today’s  9-1-
1 system, but NENA asks Congress to go a step further. NENA believes that regard-
less  of  the  service  classification—telecommunications,  information  or  otherwise—if 
a service provides a communications capability in which a customer can reasonably 
expect  to  be  able  to  reach  a  PSAP  when  dialing  9-1-1,  whether  over  the  PSTN,  an 
IP  network  or  some  other  yet  to  be  identified  path,  the  FCC  should  have  the  clear 
regulatory authority to address the 9-1-1 aspects of those services. 

This is not to suggest that the FCC should enact regulations to cover all potential 
service  types,  but  the  FCC  should  have  sufficient  authority  so  that  if  regulation  is 
deemed  necessary,  Congress  does  not  have  to  continually  go  back  and  update  laws 
based  on  every  new  communications  technology  or  service  needing  9-1-1  access. 
Therefore  we  support  the  provision  in  the  IP-Enabled  Voice  Communications  and 
Public  Safety  Act  that  authorizes  the  FCC  to  regulate  in  the  area  of  IP-enabled 
voice  communications,  but  we  ask  Congress  to  extend  that  authority  to  any  service 
that  provides  a  communications  capability  in  which  a  customer  can  reasonably  ex-
pect to be able to reach a PSAP when dialing 9-1-1. 
State Authority 

Funding  for  IP-enabled  E–911  services  and  the  development  of  the  next  genera-
tion  9-1-1  system  is  perhaps  the  most  important  issue  for  9-1-1  today.  The  public 
safety  community  is  extremely  concerned  by  the  immediate  and  growing  impact  of 
VoIP  on  loss  of  conventional  service  fees  and  surcharge  revenue,  and  the  uncer-
tainty of any requirement to replace that critical operational funding stream in the 
VoIP  environment.  We  support  the  need  for  national  direction  from  the  FCC,  just 
as we support cabinet-level attention to 9-1-1 issues through the national 9-1-1 Pro-
gram Office. 

Thus,  in  addition  to  establishing  clear  FCC  regulatory  authority,  it  is  essential 
that Congress do nothing to compromise state and local authority to impose and col-
lect  9-1-1  fees  on  all  services  where  a  customer  has  a  reasonable  expectation  of 
being  connected  to  9-1-1,  again  regardless  of  the  type  of  technology.  In  addition  to 
funding,  there  will  be  other  state  and  local  issues  as  well  that  are  best  addressed 
at  that  level,  but  it  is  clear  that  as  technology  evolves,  the  classification  of  service 
or technology type should not have an effect on the ability of state and local govern-
ment to address those issues. 

Congress should also consider ways to facilitate state and local funding of critical 
9-1-1  emergency  communications  systems.  Last  year  Congress  effectively  acted  in 
this  regard  by  passing  the  ENHANCE  911  Act  of  2004  and  authorizing  up  to  $250 
million  per  year  in  grants  for  9-1-1  system  upgrades.  However,  to  date  no  monies 
have  been  appropriated  to  fund  such  grants.  NENA  implores  Congress  to  fund  the 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

9

ENHANCE  911  Act.  The  continued  success  and  sustainability  of  our  9-1-1  system 
will greatly benefit from such action. 

While  ensuring  that  states  have  the  authority  to  impose  fees  on  VoIP  services  is 
important,  NENA  also  acknowledges  that  a  shift  in  the  9-1-1  funding  model  may 
be  needed  as  we  move  to  the  next  generation  IP-enabled  E–911  network.  This  sub-
ject is a main topic of the NENA Next Generation NG E–911 Program, a year long 
effort  that  is  also  addressing  key  next  generation  technical  and  operational  9-1-1 
issues.  All  Program  participants  agree  that  until  a  clear  solution  is  identified  for 
the immediate and long term 9-1-1 funding problem, attention to the need for tech-
nological change and evolution of the E–911 system itself is difficult to achieve. 

It  is  important  to  add  here  that  NENA  continues  to  emphasize  the  necessity  of 
state  coordination  in  the  deployment  of  E–911  services,  regardless  of  service  type. 
The  importance  of  state  coordination  for  wireless  E–911  has  been  recognized  by 
Congress  through  the  Wireless  Communications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of  1999  and 
the  ENHANCE  911  Act  of  2004.  This  has  proven  to  be  a  valid  position  as  states 
with  a  coordination  entity  are  generally  further  along  in  the  Phase  II  wireless  E–
911 deployment process. While recognizing that the delivery of 9-1-1 service is man-
aged  at  the  local  level  and  that  local  PSAPs  have  an  important  role  to  play,  Con-
gress  and  the  FCC  should  encourage  coordination  at  the  state  level  for  the  deploy-
ment of IP-enabled E–911 services. 
Non-Discriminatory Access to Capabilities and Liability Parity 

The  IP-enabled  Voice  Communications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of  2005  requires 
each  entity  with  ownership  or  control  of  9-1-1  infrastructure,  known  commonly  as 
E–911 system service providers (SSPs), to provide requesting IP-enabled service pro-
viders access to the equipment, databases, network and other necessary capabilities 
on  a  nondiscriminatory  basis.  The  bill  also  provides  immunity  from  liability  to  the 
same  extent  as  provided  to  local  telephone  exchange  companies  for  providers  of  IP-
enabled  9-1-1  service.  Additionally,  the  bill  provides  liability  protection  to  users  of 
such  services  as  well  as  liability  protection  for  PSAPs  to  the  same  extent  they  cur-
rently have for non-IP enabled services. 

On  the  issue  of  liability  parity,  the  bill  mirrors  the  language  granted  to  wireless 
carriers, users of wireless service and PSAPs answering 9-1-1 calls that is contained 
in  the  Wireless  Communications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of  1999.  It  is  important  to 
note  that  the  Wireless  Act  of  1999  was  passed  before  the  widespread  deployment 
of Phase I and Phase II wireless, an action that was deemed critical and applauded 
by  both  the  9-1-1  community  and  industry.  NENA  believes  it  is  also  important  to 
have  liability  parity  for  IP-enabled  services  enacted  into  law  before  the  quickly  ap-
proaching 120-day VoIP E–911 deadline of November 28, 2005. 

Past experience in the deployment of E–911 has shown that a lack of legal clarity 
on important topics, such as liability parity and non-discriminatory access to E–911 
capabilities,  has  led  to  a  delay  in  the  provisioning  of  E–911  service.  Therefore, 
NENA  wholeheartedly  supports  both  of  these  provisions  as  we  believe  they  are  es-
sential to ensure the timely deployment of E–911 for IP-enabled services. 
Next Generation E–911

As  noted  earlier,  NENA  believes  that  planning  now  for  the  future  9-1-1  system 
is  of  paramount  importance  and  is  why  we  have  launched  the  NG  E–911  Program. 
NENA  plans  to  release  a  comprehensive  report  on  the  findings  and  recommenda-
tions  of  that  initiative  in  early  2006  and  will  communicate  the  results  with  Con-
gress.  Therefore,  NENA  fully  supports  section  three  of  the  IP-Enabled  Voice  Com-
munications and Public Safety Act requiring the national 9-1-1 Implementation and 
Coordination  Office  to  provide  a  plan  for  the  migration  from  today’s  9-1-1  system 
towards an IP-Enabled emergency network. 
Timeframe for Action 

We hope that telecom reform will be done this year and will include the important 
9-1-1 provisions identified here. However, past experience has shown that this type 
of  reform  can  become  bogged  down  in  negotiations  and  take  longer  than  expected 
to  complete.  Should  this  happen,  NENA  believes  it  is  very  important  that  the  9-1-
1  provisions  discussed  here  be  included  in  a  stand-alone  bill,  such  as  a  slightly 
modified  version  of  the  IP-Enabled  Voice  Communications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of 
2005, and considered by Congress before the session ends this year. 
Conclusion 

Our Nation’s 9-1-1 system is a homeland security asset. Everyday 9-1-1 callers are 
the  eyes  and  ears  of  our  defense.  It  is  also  a  system  that  citizens  depend  on  daily 
in  times  of  need.  Modern  communications  capabilities  offer  an  opportunity  to  im-
prove the system as we know it, but they also offer challenges. The 9-1-1 community 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

10

must  embrace  and  react  to  change  quickly,  to  better  serve  the  American  public,  in-
dustry,  and  the  mobile  consumer  in  all  emergencies.  We  need  help  from  Congress 
in doing so. 

NENA fully supports each of the provisions in the IP-Enabled Voice Communica-
tions  and  Public  Safety  Act  as  they  pertain  to  VoIP  E–911  but  asks  Congress  to 
broaden the scope of the bill to include any service that provides a communications 
capability  in  which  a  customer  can  reasonably  expect  to  be  able  to  reach  a  PSAP 
when dialing 9-1-1. 

With  some  modifications,  the  legislation  will  make  great  contributions  toward 
public safety and security. On behalf of thousands of NENA members, the 9-1-1 pro-
fessionals  and  all  involved  in  supporting  their  work,  I  thank  you  for  your  support 
and the opportunity to be here today.

Senator  BURNS.  Thank  you.  I  forgot  to  announce—if  you  could 
keep your statements within five minutes—and your full statement 
will  be  made  part  of  the  record—it  would  certainly  help  us  a  little 
bit.  But  you’re  just  such  a  nice  fellow,  and  you  had  nice  words  for 
me, I decided to give you extra minutes. 

Jeffrey  Citron,  Vonage.  He  is  the  Co-founder,  Chairman,  and 
CEO of Vonage. Mr. Citron, thank you very much for coming today. 

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY CITRON, CHAIRMAN AND CEO, 

VONAGE 

Mr. CITRON. Thank you. Good morning, Senator Burns, Members 
of the Committee. Thank you very much for the opportunity to ap-
pear here today. I’m Jeff Citron, CEO of Vonage Holdings Corpora-
tion.  We  are  the  leading  provider  of  consumer  and  small  business 
Voice Over IP or VoIP Services in the United States, which nearly 
one  million  people  are  using  our  service  today.  Vonage  is  at  the 
forefront  of  this  new  emerging  market,  which  has  approximately 
2.3  million  users,  and  as  such,  we  are  quickly  becoming  a  leader 
in E–911. 

As we speak, Vonage is building the first ever nationwide E–911 
network designed for an all-IP environment. This new network will 
link hundreds of locally controlled selective routers, and thousands 
of public safety answering points across the country, allowing us to 
provide  comprehensive  service.  This  is  a  very  serious  undertaking. 
At  Vonage,  we  are  embracing  this  challenge  as  a  critical  partner 
in  the  Nation’s  E–911  system,  as  we  blend  voice  and  data  into  ex-
citing new offerings. 

Unfortunately,  we  are  also  confronting  long  standing  technical, 
operational, and competitive barriers, as we try to connect to a sys-
tem that is nearly obsolete. Vonage’s leading challenge is deploying 
enhanced  9-1-1  Internet  phone  service  for  all  our  users  as  quickly 
as  possible.  There  is  no  higher  priority  within  our  organization 
today. Vonage demonstrated commitment in this area by becoming 
the  first  mobile  VoIP  provider  to  adopt  a  basic  9-1-1  solution.  We 
have continued this commitment by offering the first nomadic Voice 
Over IP E–911 solution in this country. 

Mr.  Chairman,  I’m  here  today  to  make  three  points.  First, 
Vonage is running very hard and fast to build the best E–911 sys-
tem that is possible. Second, as an industry, Internet phone service 
providers face a number of challenges trying to deploy E–911. And 
third,  I  would  like  to  highlight  what  assistance  Congress  can  lend 
to ensure the industry deploys a functioning enhanced 9-1-1 service 
for all of our customers and their communities. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

11

To  date,  Vonage  has  been  working  diligently  with  many  compa-
nies,  along  with  public  safety  officials,  to  architect  a  solution  that 
works well for the entire industry, as well as our customers. Begin-
ning  at  the  grass  roots  levels  with  public  safety  officials,  Vonage 
is  already  offering  enhanced  9-1-1  service  in  New  York  City  and 
Rhode  Island,  and  in  New  York  City  alone,  we  have  fielded  thou-
sands of successful E–911 calls. 

Despite this great progress thus far, significant challenges do re-
main.  For  instance,  the  geographically  based  numbering  system  of 
the original 9-1-1 network is meaningless to Internet-based commu-
nications.  The  old  9-1-1  system  required  that  all  calls  be  local.  If 
a  citizen  in  Montana  tried  to  place  a  9-1-1  call  with  a  Montana 
phone  in  Washington  D.C.,  the  old  9-1-1  system  would  have  re-
jected this call. 

In order to accommodate that mobility, wireless carriers patched 
up  the  old  network  to  allow  for  out  of  area  9-1-1  calls  to  go 
through,  and  this  is  the  exact  same  solution  we  are  trying  to  use 
for Internet phone calling. 

Furthermore,  VoIP  providers  do  not  have  access  to  all  the  ele-
ments necessary to create a comprehensive 9-1-1 solution. Such ele-
ments  include  access  to  selective  routers  in  the  Master  Street  Ad-
dress  Guide,  also  known  as  MSAG,  as  well  as  ‘‘Pseudo-ANIs,’’ 
which we need to get calls from non-local phone numbers. 

And because there are no standards for implementation, let alone 
access to the elements, novel 9-1-1 architectures make it impossible 
to  implement  a  uniform  nationwide  solution.  Instead,  service  pro-
viders  like  Vonage  are  forced  to  deploy  a  patchwork  of  local  solu-
tions to meet the various needs of PSAPs and network owners. Im-
plementation  of  the  FCC’s  9-1-1  obligation  within  120  days  is  ex-
tremely challenging. 

We  believe  that  a  standardized  approach  giving  VoIP  providers 
access to these elements would accelerate our deployment, and cre-
ate a uniform solution for the entire country. 

Finally, Congressional action and authority can help speed Voice 
Over  IP  9-1-1  deployment  in  several  key  areas.  Currently  Voice 
Over  IP  providers  do  not  have  the  same  liability  parity  with 
wireline or wireless operators. Vonage is not protected by the exist-
ing  law  in  the  same  way  that  other  carriers  are.  Therefore,  every 
time  we  send  a  call  to  the  9-1-1  network,  we  are  putting  our  busi-
ness  at  risk  should  there  be  an  unforeseeable  network  failure  or 
mishap. 

Additionally,  in  order  to  comply  with  obligations  mandated  by 
the  FCC  9-1-1  order,  Congress  may  need  to  grant  VoIP  providers 
access to the network elements necessary to complete the enhanced 
9-1-1  call.  The  9-1-1  network  is  a  public  trust,  and  should  not  be 
used as a competitive lever or barrier. 

In  conclusion,  Mr.  Chairman,  Vonage  strongly  believes  it’s  good 
policy for our customers and for the country for anyone using Voice 
Over  IP  to  be  able  to  get  help  when  they  need  it  by  dialing  9-1-
1.  We  also  commend  the  FCC  for  the  decisive  action  mandating  a 
Voice  Over  IP  E–911  rollout.  We  now  need  Congress  to  act  to  en-
sure VoIP providers have the tools that are necessary to meet that 
mandate. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

12

We  enthusiastically  support  the  IP-Enabled  Voice  Communica-
tions and Public Safety Act of 2005, as a thoughtful, balanced piece 
of legislation that would ensure Voice Over providers can get access 
to the necessary technical elements, legal protections, flexibility, to 
create the best solution for our customers. 

I  look  forward  to  answering  any  questions  that  you  might  have, 

and thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. 

[The prepared statement of Mr. Citron follows:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF JEFFREY CITRON CO-FOUNDER, CHAIRMAN, AND CEO, 

VONAGE 

Good  morning  Senator  Burns  and  Members  of  the  Committee.  Thank  you  for  the 
opportunity to appear here today. I’m Jeffrey Citron, CEO of Vonage Holdings Cor-
poration.  We  are  the  leading  provider  of  consumer  and  small  business  Voice  over 
Internet Protocol (VoIP) services in the United States, with nearly one million sub-
scriber lines. Vonage is at the forefront of this new emerging market, which has ap-
proximately  2.3  million  users,  and  as  such  we  are  also  quickly  becoming  a  leader 
in  E–911,  as  we  move  to  deploy  the  first  ever  nationwide  9-1-1  service.  This  will 
be the first 9-1-1 service designed for an IP environment, across hundreds of locally 
controlled Selective Routers and thousands of Public Safety Answering Points. This 
is  a  serious  undertaking.  And  we  at  Vonage  are  embracing  this  challenge  not  just 
for  our  customers  but  as  a  partner  in  the  Nation’s  E–911  system.  As  we  move  for-
ward  in  this  exciting  time  in  9-1-1,  VoIP  is  helping  turn  the  notion  of  traditional 
9-1-1  networking  on  its  head.  We  are  recognizing  new  opportunities  to  blend  voice 
and data into exciting new offerings, but we are also confronting long-standing tech-
nical,  operational  and  competitive  barriers,  as  we  try  to  connect  to  a  system  that 
all too often is obsolete and sheltered by old-fashioned telecom thinking. 

To that end, Vonage is leading the charge to deploy Enhanced 911 Internet phone 
services for all of our users as quickly as possible. There is no higher priority within 
Vonage today. Vonage demonstrated commitment in this area by becoming the first 
mobile  VoIP  provider  to  adopt  a  basic  9-1-1  solution,  and  we  will  further  this  com-
mitment by offering the first nomadic VoIP E–911 solution in this country. 

Mr.  Chairman,  I  am  here  today  to  make  three  points.  First,  Vonage  is  running 
hard and fast to build the best 9-1-1 system possible. Second, as an industry, Inter-
net  phone  providers  face  a  number  of  challenges  in  trying  to  deploy  Enhanced  911. 
These challenges are similar to those faced by wireless companies when they began 
offering  E–911  services  over  ten  years  ago.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  highlight  what 
assistance Congress can lend to ensure the industry deploys a functioning Enhanced 
911 service for our customers and their communities. 

To  date,  Vonage  has  been  working  diligently  with  the  technology  companies, 
Bells,  CLECs  and  public  safety  officials  to  architect  a  solution  that  works  well  for 
the  industry  and  our  customers.  Working  at  the  grassroots  level  with  public  safety 
officials,  Vonage  is  already  offering  Enhanced  911  service  in  New  York  City  and 
Rhode  Island.  In  New  York  City  alone,  we  have  already  fielded  thousands  of  suc-
cessful  E–911  calls.  We  recently  signed  a  contract  with  SBC  to  gain  access  to  the 
9-1-1  elements  we  need  throughout  their  13-state  territory  to  begin  offering  E–911 
in  SBC’s  footprint.  Vonage  is  also  working  with  Level  3  on  a  nationwide  basis  to 
use  their  existing  network  to  route  calls  to  the  E–911  system.  With  our  technology 
partners  TCS  and  Intrado,  Vonage’s  9-1-1  solution  enables  calls  to  go  to  the  right 
9-1-1 answering center even when our users change physical location. Perhaps most 
importantly,  last  month  Vonage  initiated  an  outreach  program  to  begin  a  dialogue 
with  the  public  safety  community  regarding  our  plans  to  implement  a  novel  E–911 
solution within a very short timeframe. 

Despite  this  great  progress  thus  far,  significant  challenges  remain.  For  instance, 
the  geographically-based  numbering  system  of  the  original  9-1-1  network  is  mean-
ingless  to  Internet-based  communications.  The  old  9-1-1  system  required  that  all 
calls  be  ‘‘local.’’  If  a  citizen  from  Montana  tried  to  place  a  wireless  9-1-1  with  her 
Montana  phone  in  Washington  DC,  the  old  9-1-1  system  would  have  rejected  that 
call.  In  order  to  accommodate  that  mobility,  we  patched  the  network  to  allow  for 
‘‘dummy  numbers’’  to  get  those  out  of  area  9-1-1  calls  through.  This  is  the  exact 
same solution we’re using for Internet phone calls, but in order to make it work for 
us, we need access to the same technical elements that wireless companies use. 

Furthermore,  VoIP  providers  do  not  have  access  to  all  the  elements  necessary  to 
create  a  comprehensive  9-1-1  solution.  Such  elements  include  access  to  selective 
routers  and  the  Master  Street  Address  Guide  (MSAG),  as  well  as  ‘‘Psuedo-ANI’’ 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

13

(dummy  numbers)  which  we  need  to  get  calls  from  non-local  numbers  into  the  9-
1-1 system. And because there are no standards for implementation, let alone access 
to  elements,  novel  9-1-1  architectures  make  it  impossible  to  implement  a  uniform 
nationwide  solution.  Instead,  service  providers  like  Vonage  are  forced  to  deploy  a 
patchwork  of  local  solutions  to  meet  the  various  needs  of  PSAPs  and  network  own-
ers,  making  the  implementation  of  the  FCC’s  9-1-1  obligation  within  120  days  dif-
ficult  if  not  impossible.  We  believe  that  a  standardized  approach  giving  VoIP  pro-
viders  access  to  these  elements  would  accelerate  our  deployment  and  create  a  uni-
form solution for the entire country. 

Finally, Congressional action and authority can help speed VoIP 9-1-1 deployment 
in  several  key  areas.  Currently,  VoIP  providers  do  not  have  liability  parity  with 
wireline or wireless operators. Vonage is not protected by existing laws in the same 
way  other  carriers  are—therefore  every  time  we  send  a  call  into  the  9-1-1  network 
we  are  putting  our  business  at  risk  should  there  be  an  unforeseeable  network  fail-
ure or other mishap. Right now, the burden is singularly the VoIP provider’s to bear 
should something go wrong. 

Additionally,  in  order  to  comply  with  the  obligations  mandated  by  the  FCC’s  9-
1-1 Order, Congress may need to grant VoIP providers access to all the network ele-
ments  necessary  to  complete  an  Enhanced  911  call.  The  9-1-1  network  is  a  public 
trust, and should not be used as a competitive lever. 

In conclusion Mr. Chairman, Vonage strongly believes it is good policy for our cus-
tomers  and  the  country  for  anyone  using  a  VoIP  application  to  be  able  to  get  help 
when they need it by dialing 9-1-1. 

We  also  commend  the  FCC  for  their  decisive  action  in  mandating  an  aggressive 
timetable for VoIP E–911 rollout. We now need Congress to act to ensure VoIP pro-
viders  have  the  tools  necessary  to  meet  that  mandate.  We  enthusiastically  support 
the  IP-Enabled  Voice  Communications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of  2005  as  a  thought-
ful,  balanced  piece  of  legislation  that  would  ensure  VoIP  providers  can  get  access 
to  the  necessary  technology  elements,  legal  protections  and  flexibility  to  create  the 
best solution for our customers. 

I look forward to answering any questions you may have. Thank you.
SENATOR BURNS.  Thank  you  very  much.  I’ve  got  a  couple  ques-
tions  coming  off  that  statement.  Next  we  have  Ms.  Wanda 
McCarley, who is with APCO. Thank you for coming today. 
STATEMENT  OF  WANDA  MCCARLEY,  PRESIDENT–ELECT  OF 
THE  ASSOCIATION  OF  PUBLIC–SAFETY  COMMUNICATIONS 
OFFICIALS–INTERNATIONAL (APCO) 
Ms.  MCCARLEY.  Thank  you,  Senator  Burns,  for  the  opportunity 
to appear at this hearing today to discuss the critical issue of Voice 
Over  Internet  Protocol  services,  and  their  impact  on  the  provision 
of 9-1-1 service by our Nation’s public safety answering points. 

I am the President-Elect of the Association of Public Safety Com-
munications Officials International, known as APCO, a professional 
association  of  over  16,000  individuals  who  manage  and  operate 
public  safety  communications  systems  for  state  and  local  govern-
ment  agencies  across  our  Nation.  APCO  has  long  been  an  active 
participant  in  FCC  proceedings  and  Congressional  actions  con-
cerning  public  safety  communications,  addressing  both  radio  spec-
trum  issues,  and  Enhanced  9-1-1  issues,  that  impact  the  oper-
ational  requirements  of  PSAPs,  and  the  ability  of  emergency  per-
sonnel to respond quickly and accurately to 9-1-1 calls. 

I  am  also  the  operations  and  training  manager  for  the  Tarrant 
County  9-1-1  District  in  Fort  Worth,  where  I  work  day  to  day  on 
the challenges facing PSAPs. 

APCO has long been deeply concerned with the ability of PSAPs 
to  respond  effectively  to  9-1-1  calls  made  through  Voice  Over  IP 
providers.  Early  on,  there  were  problems  with  Voice  Over  IP  calls 
being routed to the wrong PSAP, in some areas to PSAPs in distant 
states. Some Voice Over IP providers adopted a strategy of routing 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

14

9-1-1  calls  to  PSAPs’  ten-digit  emergency  or  administrative  num-
bers.  However,  these  administrative  numbers  are  not  usually  an-
swered  by  trained  9-1-1  call  takers.  Indeed  calls  to  these  adminis-
trative  numbers  often  go  to  voice  mail  systems  with  a  taped  mes-
sage informing callers to hang up and dial 9-1-1 if this is an emer-
gency. 

Unfortunately,  that  inability  to  get  through  to  a  9-1-1  call  taker 
from  a  Voice  Over  IP  phone  has  led  to  dangerous  delays  in  dis-
patching  emergency  personnel,  and  as  described  in  recent  testi-
mony before the FCC, tragic, and perhaps avoidable deaths in cer-
tain instances. 

In May, the FCC addressed this problem with firm but fair rules 
to ensure that Voice Over IP 9-1-1 calls will be delivered to the cor-
rect PSAPs, with the location information necessary for rapid emer-
gency  responses.  APCO  applauds  FCC  Chairman  Martin  and  his 
colleagues for this critical and courageous decision. Absent FCC ac-
tion,  we  would  still  be  searching  for  solutions  to  protect  the  safety 
of  a  growing  number  of  Voice  Over  IP  subscribers,  most  of  whom 
choose  their  telephone  service  without  realizing  the  potential  dif-
ficulties of calling 9-1-1, and receiving emergency assistance. 

Of  course,  still  more  needs  to  be  done.  The  definition  of  Voice 
Over  IP  services  covered  by  the  new  rules  may  need  to  be  refined, 
and  we  need  to  find  ways  for  call  location  information  to  be  pro-
vided  automatically  without  caller  intervention.  We  also  need  to 
find  ways  to  locate  Voice  Over  IP  callers  who  interconnect  to  the 
Internet from different physical locations. The FCC is currently ex-
amining  these  issues,  and  we  urge  the  Commission,  Voice  Over  IP 
providers, and the public safety community to work together to find 
solutions  as  quickly  as  possible.  We  commend  those  Voice  Over  IP 
providers who are working cooperatively toward these goals. 

APCO  also  believes  that  Congress  and  the  FCC  should  look  into 
the future, and adopt a rule to ensure that yet to be developed tele-
phone  technologies  will  be  subject  to  appropriate  9-1-1  require-
ments.  Unfortunately,  Voice  Over  IP  took  off  in  the  marketplace 
before  necessary  9-1-1  protections  could  be  adopted.  That  left  the 
public  at  risk,  even  while  they  were  enjoying  the  fruits  of  the  new 
technology.  APCO  believes  that  all  voice  communications  that 
interconnect  with  the  public  switched  telephone  network,  and  use 
standard telephone numbering, must provide full E–911 capability. 
We know some have urged that PSAPs upgrade their systems to 
IP  technology.  While  APCO  strongly  supports  technological  im-
provement to PSAPs, we urge extreme caution. First, under no cir-
cumstances  should  the  current  state  of  PSAP  technology  serve  as 
an  excuse  for  non-compliance  by  providers  of  Voice  Over  IP  and 
other  telephone  services.  These  services  should  be  required  to  de-
liver 9-1-1 calls to the existing PSAP networks. 

Secondly,  calls  for  PSAP  system  upgrades  overlook  the  funda-
mental financial constraints facing PSAPs. Most operate on limited 
budgets,  with  funding  coming  from  either  subscriber  fees,  or  local 
government appropriations. Either way, most PSAPs can not afford 
the  enormous  cost  of  switching  to  IP-based  technologies.  Thus  any 
discussion  of  upgrading  PSAP  capability  must  be  accompanied  by 
discussions for full funding for these upgrades. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

15

Overall,  funding  for  PSAPs  is  another  critical  issue  that  we  be-
lieve  Congress  needs  to  help  us  address.  It  is  essential  that  there 
continues  to  be  a  reliable  source  of  funding  for  PSAPs  even  as  we 
move  toward  new  forms  of  telephone  communications.  One  way  or 
another,  all  users  of  the  telephone  network  who  might  someday 
need  to  call  9-1-1  must  contribute  towards  the  cost  of  providing  9-
1-1 services. 

APCO  has  created  a  task  force  to  examine  the  future  funding 
challenges  for  PSAPs,  and  has  prepared  a  white  paper  on  sustain-
able  funding  models  for  emergency  telecommunications  across  the 
country, which we would be happy to make available. 

Senator  Burns,  I  want  to  sincerely  thank  you  again  for  the  op-
portunity  to  appear  at  this  important  field  hearing.  APCO  looks 
forward to working with you and other Members of the Committee, 
and  other  members  of  the  public  safety  community,  in  addressing 
this and other critical public safety issues. 

[The prepared statement of Ms. McCarley follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF WANDA MCCARLEY,  PRESIDENT-ELECT OF

THE
ASSOCIATION OF PUBLIC-SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS OFFICIALS-INTERNATIONAL 
(APCO) 
Thank  you  Senator  Burns  for  the  opportunity  to  appear  at  this  hearing  today  to 
discuss the critical issue of Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) services and the im-
pact of those services on the provision of 9-1-1 services by our Nation’s public safety 
answering points (PSAPs). 

I am here today in my capacity as the president-elect of the Association of Public-
Safety  Communications  Officials-International,  known  as  APCO,  a  professional  as-
sociation  of  over  16,000  individuals  who  manage  and  operate  public  safety  commu-
nications systems for state and local government agencies across the Nation. APCO 
has  long  been  an  active  participant  in  FCC  proceedings  and  congressional  actions 
concerning public safety communications, addressing both radio spectrum issues and 
Enhanced  9-1-1  (‘‘E–911’’)  matters  that  impact  the  operational  requirements  of 
PSAPs and the ability of emergency personnel to respond quickly and accurately to 
9-1-1 calls. 

I  am  also  here  today  as  the  Operations  and  Training  Manager  for  the  Tarrant 
County,  Texas  9-1-1  District  where  I  work  day-to-day  on  the  challenges  facing 
PSAPs. 

APCO has long been deeply concerned with the ability of PSAPs to respond effec-
tively  to  9-1-1  calls  made  through  VoIP  providers.  Early  on,  there  were  problems 
with VoIP calls being routed to the wrong PSAP, in some cases to PSAPs in distant 
states.  Some  VoIP  providers  adopted  a  strategy  of  routing  ‘‘9-1-1’’  calls  to  PSAPs’ 
ten-digit administrative numbers. In may cases, however, those administrative num-
bers are not answered by trained 9-1-1 call-takers. Indeed, calls to those administra-
tive  numbers  often  go  into  voice-mail,  with  a  taped  message  informing  callers  to 
‘‘hang  up  and  dial  9-1-1  if  this  is  an  emergency.’’  Unfortunately,  that  inability  to 
get  through  to  a  9-1-1  call-taker  from  a  VoIP  phone  has  led  to  dangerous  delays  in 
dispatching  emergency  personnel  and,  as  was  described  in  recent  testimony  before 
the FCC, tragic and perhaps avoidable deaths in several instances. 

In  May,  the  FCC  addressed  this  problem  with  firm,  but  fair  rules  to  ensure  that 
VoIP 9-1-1 calls will be delivered to the correct PSAPs with the location information 
necessary  for  rapid  emergency  responses.  APCO  applauds  FCC  Chairman  Martin 
and  his  colleagues  for  this  critical  decision.  Absent  FCC  action,  we  would  still  be 
searching  for  solutions  to  protect  the  safety  of  the  growing  number  of  VoIP  sub-
scribers, most of whom choose their telephone service without realizing the potential 
difficulties of calling 9-1-1 and receiving emergency assistance. 

Of course, still more needs to be done. The definition of VoIP services covered by 
the new rules need to be refined, and we need to find ways for call-location informa-
tion  to  be  provided  automatically,  without  caller  intervention.  We  also  need  to  find 
ways to locate VoIP callers who interconnect to the Internet from different physical 
locations.  The  FCC  is  currently  examining  these  issues,  and  we  urge  the  Commis-
sion, VoIP providers and the public safety community to work together to find solu-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

16

tions  as  quickly  as  possible.  We  commend  those  VoIP  providers  who  have  elected 
to work cooperatively with public safety towards this goal. 

APCO  also  believes  that  Congress  and  the  FCC  should  look  into  the  future,  and 
adopt  a  rule  to  ensure  that  yet-to-be  developed  telephone  technologies  will  be  sub-
ject  to  appropriate  9-1-1  requirements.  Unfortunately,  VoIP  took  off  in  the  market-
place before necessary 9-1-1 protections could be adopted by the FCC. That left the 
public at risk, even while they were enjoying the fruits of the new technology. APCO 
believes  that  all  voice  communications  services  that  interconnect  with  the  public-
switched telephone and use standard telephone numbering must provide full E–911 
capability. 

We  know  that  some  have  urged  that  PSAPs  upgrade  their  systems  to  IP  tech-
nology.  While  APCO  strongly  supports  technological  improvements  for  PSAPs,  we 
urge  extreme  caution.  First,  under  no  circumstances  should  the  current  state  of 
PSAP  technology  serve  as  an  excuse  for  non-compliance  by  providers  of  VoIP  or 
other  ‘‘new’’  telephone  services.  Those  services  should  be  required  to  deliver  9-1-1 
calls  to  the  existing  PSAP  networks.  Second,  calls  for  PSAP  system  upgrades  over-
look  the  fundamental  financial  constraints  facing  PSAPs.  Most  operate  on  limited 
budgets with funding coming either from subscriber fees or local government appro-
priations.  Either  way,  most  PSAPs  (many  who  have  just  completed  upgrades  to  ac-
cept  wireless  E–911  calls)  cannot  afford  the  enormous  cost  of  switching  to  IP-based 
technologies.  Thus,  any  discussion  of  upgrading  PSAP  capability  must  be  accom-
panied by discussions of full funding for those upgrades. 

Overall,  funding  for  PSAPs  is  another  critical  issue  that  we  believe  Congress 
needs  to  help  address.  It  is  essential  that  there  continues  to  be  a  reliable  source 
of funding for PSAPs even as we move towards new forms of telephone communica-
tion.  One  way  or  another,  all  users  of  the  telephone  network  who  might  someday 
need  to  call  9-1-1  must  contribute  towards  the  cost  of  providing  9-1-1  services. 
APCO has created a task force to examine the future funding challenges for PSAPs, 
and  has  prepared  a  white  paper  on  sustainable  funding  models  for  emergency  tele-
communications  across  the  country.  I  would  be  happy  to  make  copies  of  this  white 
paper available to the Committee. 

Senator  Burns,  I  want  to  thank  you  again  for  this  opportunity  to  appear  at  this 
important  field  hearing.  APCO  looks  forward  to  working  with  you  and  other  Mem-
bers of the Committee in addressing this and other critical public safety issues.

Senator  BURNS.  Thank  you  for  your  testimony.  Mr.  Greg  Rohde, 
who  is  Executive  Director  of  the  E–911  Institute.  Thank  you  for 
coming. 

STATEMENT OF GREG ROHDE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, E–911 

INSTITUTE 

Mr. ROHDE. Thank you for inviting me here to testify. I really ap-
preciate the invitation to testify here at this field hearing. It’s very 
fitting  that  this  hearing  is  being  held  on  the  first  day  of  National 
Preparedness  Month.  In  my  judgment,  access  to  E–911  services  is 
a  fundamental  component  of  community  preparedness.  For  our 
country  to  receive  a  sufficient  level  of  nationwide  preparedness, 
we’re going to need to have universal access to E–911 services. 

The legislation which is the subject matter of this hearing really, 
as you know, parallels action by the FCC earlier this year in June 
that  requires  VoIP,  providers  of  VoIP  services  to  provide  access  to 
E–911 capabilities to their subscribers. 

But  you  also  know  it  goes  further.  In  particular,  the  legislation 
addresses two areas that the FCC asserted it did not have author-
ity  to  address.  One  area  is  the  area  of  liability  protection;  and  the 
second  is  the  area  of  requiring  access  to  emergency  services  infra-
structure,  such  as  selected  routers,  on  the  part  of  VoIP  providers. 
In  my  judgment,  both  these  areas  are  necessary  for  successful 
implementation of E–911 over IP-enabled communications systems, 
and these provisions, as well as other provisions, really make your 
legislation necessary. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

17

I’ll restrict my comments to making just three brief points about 
the  legislation  itself.  One  is:  I  would  like  comment  on  a  provision 
which is probably overshadowed by many of the other provisions in 
the Act, and that is the provision that requires the new Joint Pro-
gram  Office  that  was  established  in  the  ENHANCE  9-1-1  Act  en-
acted  last  year,  to  provide  a  national  migration  plan  for  IP  emer-
gency communications systems. 

While  the  provision  might  be  overshadowed,  it  might  very  well 
be in the long run the most significant provision in your legislation, 
requiring the Administration to begin establishing a migration plan 
for  citizen  activated  national  IP-based  communications  system  is 
badly needed, and the time to develop it is now. 

Certainly what gets the headlines, and what gets most of the at-
tention,  are  the  aspects  of  this  issue  with  respect  to  the  relation-
ship  between  E–911  and  VoIP  services  are  on  the  challenges  that 
such relationships impose on the existing system. Those challenges 
need to be overcome, and is clearly a top priority. 

However, that’s not the whole story. The other piece of the story 
is  we  can’t  forget  that  moving  to  an  IP-based  communications  sys-
tem  provides  an  enormous  opportunity  to  get  ahead  of  the  game, 
and  potentially  provide  significant  new  opportunities  and  tools  for 
public safety and citizens to respond to emergencies. 

So  I  really  applaud  the  foresightfulness  of  the  legislation,  and 
the  fact  you  appreciate  the  fact  that  IP  communications  systems 
can  in  the  long  term  greatly  enhance  public  safety.  We  cannot 
leave  the  emergency  communications  systems  in  the  country  in  a 
perpetual  state  of  playing  catch-up.  We  have  an  opportunity  now 
to  get  ahead  of  the  game,  and  pushing  the  Administration  to  de-
velop a plan is essential. 

In  addition  to  pushing  your  legislation  and  this  provision,  I 
would also suggest you consider ways to commit more resources to 
either  the  Joint  Program  Office,  or  to  the  Institute  for  Tele-
communications  Sciences,  the  research  lab  of  the  National  Tele-
communications  Information  Administration.  Both  or  either  of 
these entities and the Federal industry can work cooperatively with 
industry on public safety, and really develop an effective migration 
plan. 

My second point is on the provision that requires the FCC to es-
tablish  requirements  and  obligations  for  IP-enabled  voice  service 
providers to ensure that the customers have access to 9-1-1 and E–
911 services. As I stated before, the FCC has already taken this ac-
tion.  The  FCC  deserves  an  enormous  amount  of  credit.  I  think  to 
a person, all four of the existing Commissioners are very dedicated 
to  public  safety,  and  work  very  hard  to  take  this  very  important 
step. 

However,  this  particular  requirement  is  so  important  that  it 
should  not  be  left  to  a  regulatory  rule.  I  think  that  it’s  necessary 
for it to become a matter of statute. As you know, commissions can 
change,  new  players  can  come  in.  We  don’t  want  to  have  the  cir-
cumstance of a future commission revisiting this issue. So it should 
be made a matter of statute. 

I  also  suspect  that  the  deadline  set  by  the  FCC  for  compliance 
is going to be less a finish line, and more the beginning of the end. 
As  we  learned,  and  as  we  are  currently  learning  in  the  implemen-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

18

tation  of  wireless  E–911  services,  that  you  simply  can’t  impose 
deadlines  and  expect  it  to  happen.  The  FCC  is  going  to  have  to 
manage  compliance,  not  simply  assert  it,  and  it’s  going  to  work 
carefully  with  industry,  and  need  to  maintain  flexibility  in  impos-
ing and enforcing the rules, but allow the industry to have a flexi-
ble way of achieving those rules. 

This  industry  in  particular  is  characterized  by  rapid  change  and 
innovation,  and  should  allow  and  foresee  that  as  an  opportunity, 
not as a problem. 

My third and final point is the issue of definitions—telecommuni-
cations  versus  information  services.  In  my  judgment,  there  we  do 
have  a  circumstance  of  regulatory  failure.  The  regulators  are  in 
part responsible for problems that we’ve had, and some of the early 
headlines  we’ve  seen  of  citizens  calling  9-1-1  and  VoIP  not  being 
able to connect. 

The reason why is the FCC. The regulators have allowed the pro-
viders  to  hide  under  the  shroud  of  calling  themselves  an  informa-
tion  service,  when  in  truth  they  are  a  telecommunications  service. 
As you know, Senator, it’s very clear from the letter of intent of the 
1996  Telecommunications  Act,  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  dis-
tinction  between  voice  and  data  service.  The  FCC  over  the  past 
several  years  has  pursued  an  agenda  to  create  escape  hatches  out 
of the statute. 

I  would  suggest  that  you  consider,  either  as  part  of  this  legisla-
tion  or  some  other  legislation  considered  by  the  Commerce  Com-
mittee, that you address this issue head on, and clarify to the Com-
mission that any service that is sold, and functions, and looks, and 
acts like traditional telephone voice service is a telecommunications 
service, period. 

With that, I’d be happy to answer any questions. 
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rohde follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF GREGORY L. ROHDE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, E–911 

INSTITUTE 

Introduction 

Senator  Burns,  thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  testify  at  this  field  hear-
ing today on S. 1063, the ‘‘IP-Enabled Voice Communications and Public Safety Act 
of  2005.’’  It  is  very  fitting  that  this  hearing  is  being  held  on  the  first  day  of  ‘‘Na-
tional  Preparedness  Month.’’  The  nationwide  emergency  call  number,  9-1-1,  is  the 
citizens’  link  to  emergency  response.  In  my  judgment,  access  E–911  (enhanced  9-1-
1) services is a fundamental component of community preparedness. For our country 
to  achieve  a  sufficient  level  of  nationwide  preparedness,  we  need  universal  access 
to  E–911  services.  Addressing  the  challenges  in  implementing  E–911  over  IP-based 
communications systems is one of the many issues that require the attention of Con-
gress and regulators at the Federal and state levels to advance public safety. 

My  name  is  Gregory  L.  Rohde  and  I  serve  as  the  Executive  Director  of  the  E–
911 Institute. The Institute is a not-for-profit organization and, as you know, works 
closely  with  the  Congressional  E–911  Caucus,  which  you  co-chair  with  your  col-
leagues, Senator Hillary Clinton (D–NY), Representative John Shimkus (R–IL), and 
Representative  Anna  Eshoo  (D–CA).  The  Institute  is  not  an  advocacy  organization 
and  my  work  for  the  organization  is  completely  voluntary,  i.e.,  without  compensa-
tion.  My  testimony  today  reflects  my  personal  views  and  I  am  not  advocating  any 
particular position on behalf of the E–911 Institute members. 

The  E–911  Institute  has  approximately  600  members  from  around  the  country. 
Our  membership  includes  individuals  from  the  public  safety  community,  first  re-
sponders,  academics,  industry  professionals,  and  government  officials  at  the  local, 
state, and Federal levels. We conduct educational events for policymakers, including 
community  forums  done  in  conjunction  with  our  affiliation  with  the  Citizen  Corps 
program in the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Our funding comes entirely 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

19

from donations from our members and organizations which share our mission to ad-
vance E–911 through education and awareness efforts. 
General Comments on S. 1063

2005 would: 

As  introduced,  the  IP-Enabled  Voice  Communications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of 
• Require  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  to  ‘‘establish  re-
quirements  or  obligations  on  providers  on  IP-enabled  voice  service  to  ensure 
that  9-1-1  and  E–911  services  are  available  to  customers  of  IP-enabled  voice 
services;’’
• Require  IP-enabled  voice  providers  to  notify  their  customers  if  their  service 
cannot provide 9-1-1 or E–911 service; 
• Require  entities  which  own  or  control  the  ‘‘necessary  emergency  services  in-
frastructure’’  to  provide  non–discriminatory  access  to  IP-enabled  voice  service 
providers; 
• Establish liability immunity related to IP-enabled voice service that is on par 
with  liability  protections  afforded  to  9-1-1  service  over  wireless  or  traditional 
landline telephone service; and 
• Require the Joint Program Office established under the ENHANCE 911 Act 
to develop a plan for migrating from the existing 9-1-1 system to a national IP-
enabled emergency network. 

This legislation parallels the recent action by the FCC in June of this year requir-
ing  interconnected  VoIP  (Voice  over  Internet  Protocol)  service  providers  to  provide 
E–911  capabilities  to  their  subscribers,  but  it  also  goes  further.  In  particular,  the 
legislation  addresses  two  areas  which  the  FCC  asserted  it  lacked  authority:  (1)  li-
ability protection and (2) requiring access to emergency services infrastructure such 
as  selective  routers.  In  my  judgment,  both  these  areas  are  necessary  to  ensure  a 
successful  implementation  of  E–911  over  IP-enabled  voice  service  systems.  This 
makes  your  legislation  necessary  and  would  complement  the  actions  already  taken 
by  the  FCC  to  require  9-1-1  and  E–911  over  IP-enabled  telecommunications  sys-
tems. 
National Migration Plan Requirement 

One  unique  provision  in  your  legislation  which  merits  further  discussion  at  this 
hearing  is  the  provision  requiring  the  establishment  of  a  national  migration  plan 
for an IP-enabled emergency communications system. While the provision to require 
the Joint Program Office to establish a plan to migrate to an IP-enabled emergency 
communications  system  may  be  overshadowed  by  other  provisions  in  S.  1063,  it 
could  become  one  of  the  most  significant  aspects  of  your  legislation.  Until  recently, 
E–911  issues  have  received  little  Federal  attention.  The  work  of  the  Congressional 
E–911  Caucus,  including  the  successful  passage  and  enactment  of  the  ENHANCE 
911  Act,  has  helped  to  elevate  the  discussion  of  E–911  issues  at  the  Federal  level. 
Requiring the Administration to begin establishing a migration plan for a citizen ac-
tivated  national  IP-based  emergency  communications  system  is  badly  needed  and 
the time to develop such a plan is now. 

Much  of  the  focus  on  E–911  issues  with  respect  to  IP-enabled  communications 
systems  is  centered  on  the  challenges  that  IP-enabled  systems  impose  on  the  cur-
rent  9-1-1  emergency  call  number  system.  Indeed,  there  are  significant  issues  that 
must  be  addressed  and  the  ‘‘near  term’’  issues  of  ensuring  E–911  access  over  the 
current  generation  of  VoIP  systems  is  a  top  priority.  Consumers  expect  that  any 
service  which  is  sold  to  them  as  a  ‘‘telephone  service’’  will  be  able  to  connect  to  9-
1-1 and Federal and state regulators should not allow a voice communications serv-
ice to be sold to the public without such capability. 

However,  the  story  of  how  E–911  relates  to  the  IP-enabled  communications  sys-
tem  is  not  limited  only  to  the  challenges  VoIP  E–911  imposes  on  the  existing  sys-
tem.  As  we  address  these  immediate  challenges,  we  cannot  lose  sight  of  the  poten-
tial  benefits  and  enhancements  that  IP-enabled  communications  systems  can  mean 
for emergency communications. Significant research and development efforts are un-
derway  which  explore  the  next  generation  9-1-1  systems  that  could  be  created  on 
an IP-based system. Such a system, if developed and deployed effectively, could pro-
vide  citizens,  call  centers,  and  first  responders  with  greatly  enhanced  tools  to  ad-
dress calls for help via 9-1-1. 

I applaud your insightfulness to be forward looking and to appreciate the fact that 
IP-enabled  communications  systems  can,  in  the  long-term,  greatly  enhance  public 
safety  communications.  Pushing  the  Joint  Program  Office  to  explore  these  capabili-
ties  and  develop  a  national  plan  is  the  right  step  to  take  at  this  point  in  time.  We 
do  have  an  opportunity  to  get  ahead  of  the  game.  Our  emergency  communications 
systems  should  not  remain  in  a  perpetual  state  of  ‘‘catch  up.’’  The  proliferation  of 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

20

broadband  access  and  the  emergence  of  new  IP-enabled  applications  such  as  VoIP 
are  creating  an  opportunity  to  build  a  better,  more  capable  system  that  enhances 
public safety. Thoughtful planning, at the Federal level working in cooperation with 
local, state, and tribal officials is a necessary first mover towards this objective. 

In  addition  to  pressing  the  Joint  Program  Office,  as  provided  in  S.  1063,  to  de-
velop  a  migration  plan  for  the  next  generation  E–911  system,  I  would  suggest,  in 
addition, that you consider ways to commit more Federal resources for research and 
development  of  IP-enabled  emergency  communications  systems  through  appro-
priating funds to the Joint Program Office and/or to the Institute for Telecommuni-
cations  Sciences  (ITS),  the  research  laboratory  of  the  National  Telecommunications 
and Information Administration (NTIA). Either ITS or the Joint Program Office can 
work  cooperatively  with  public  safety,  industry,  and  academia  to  develop  the  next 
generation 9-1-1 system that is IP-based and provides greatly enhanced capabilities 
than the present system today. 
E–911 Access Requirements for IP-Enabled Services 

Section  2  of  S.  1063  requires  the  FCC  to  establish  requirements  and  obligations 
on  IP-enabled  voice  service  providers  to  ensure  that  their  customers  have  access  to 
9-1-1 and E–911 services. While the FCC has already taken this action under their 
authority, making this a statutory requirement is very important. The current FCC 
displayed admirable leadership in taking this action, but it is still only a regulation 
that  could  be  changed  at  a  later  point  in  time.  A  mandate  to  provide  access  to  E–
911  over  IP-enabled  voice  communications  systems  is  important  enough  that  it 
should  be  a  requirement  in  the  statute.  Going  forward,  the  FCC’s  role  should  be  to 
manage the implementation of this requirement and not to entertain considerations 
and appeals to reverse course. 

I  suspect  that  the  deadline  set  by  the  FCC  for  compliance  is  going  to  be  less  a 
finish  line  and  more  the  beginning  of  the  end.  As  we  have  learned  from  the  FCC’s 
attempt  to  implement  wireless  E–911,  achieving  the  goal  is  more  complicated  than 
simply  setting  deadlines.  There  are  technological  limitations  and  the  ability  of  pro-
viders to meet the requirements changes as technology develops. 

The  FCC  needs  to  manage  compliance,  not  simply  assert  it.  The  Commission 
should  be  clear  in  the  objectives  it  desires  from  providers,  but  allow  the  industry 
flexibility  in  meeting  those  objectives.  The  FCC  needs  to  be  a  strong  enforcer,  but 
more importantly, the Commission needs to play the role of pushing providers under 
its jurisdiction to optimize the performance of the best available technology and not 
reduce  their  role  into  a  ‘‘gotcha  game.’’  The  IP-enabled  services  area  is  a  highly  in-
novative  sector  characterized  by  rapid  change.  It  is  important  to  use  this  oppor-
tunity  for  innovation  to  the  advantage  of  public  safety.  Therefore,  enforcement  of 
FCC  requirements  should  be  flexible  and  always  mindful  of  technology  evolution 
and the advantages that innovation can provide. 

As Congress considers directives to the FCC to require access to 9-1-1 and E–911 
service on IP-enabled voice service providers, assume that the FCC will have to en-
gage  in  some  complex  implementation  activity.  The  Congress  should  contemplate 
significant oversight and require the FCC to continuously report on progress. 
Telecommunications vs. Information Services 

I would also encourage you to address the fundamental regulatory cause of failure 
with respect to the availability of VoIP service to provide access to 9-1-1 and E–911 
services. The core of this problem lies in the FCC’s agenda to engage in definitional 
hairsplitting  with  respect  to  telecommunications  and  information  services  defini-
tions.  While  the  statute  does  not  distinguish  between  voice  and  data  services,  the 
FCC, nevertheless, has created this artificial distinction in order to pursue a service 
classification game designed to undermine the statute. In the process, the FCC has 
made  it  possible  for  voice  communications  services  to  be  sold  to  the  public  which 
lack access to 9-1-1 and E–911. 

VoIP  service  that  is  sold  to  the  public  as  an  alternative  to  traditional  telephone 
service should have never been allowed to hide under the shroud of being an ‘‘infor-
mation  service’’  and  avoid  the  obligations  imposed  on  traditional  voice  service.  One 
of those obligations is to provide access to E–911. In my judgment, the VoIP services 
that look, act, and function like traditional voice service should have never been al-
lowed to be sold to the public unless 9-1-1 and E–911 was a standard feature of the 
service. The current FCC deserves credit for their leadership, but the previous FCC 
deserves  an  equal  share  of  responsibility  for  allowing  this  circumstance  to  emerge 
in the first place. 

This is 2005, not 1905. We live in an era of advanced telecommunications services 
and  there  is  no  reason  why  services  being  sold  and  marketed  to  the  public  would 
be  absent  the  basic  emergency  communications  feature  most  Americans  expect 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

21

today—access to the 9-1-1 system. While I have very high praise for the leadership 
of Chairman Kevin Martin and his fellow Commissioners who acted with speed and 
clarity  on  this  matter,  I  am  deeply  disturbed  by  the  fact  that  the  FCC  had  to  act 
after the fact. 

But, we are where we are and it would not be in the best interest of the approxi-
mately  2  million  consumers  with  VoIP  service  to  have  their  service  terminated.  In 
fact,  the  Commission  acted  wisely  last  week,  in  my  judgment,  in  demonstrating 
some flexibility with respect to enforcing the June 3rd order by extending the dead-
line for positive affirmation from consumers that they are aware of the service limi-
tations  of  their  VoIP  service.  While  the  FCC  rule  is  a  good  one—customers  should 
be  made  aware  of  the  service  limitations  of  their  service—the  FCC  did  the  right 
thing in not using the ultimate hammer by terminating service at this time. Termi-
nation  of  service  should  be  done  only  in  extreme  cases  of  non-cooperation  by  pro-
viders  and  imposed  by  the  Commission  only  with  respect  to  actions  that  are  in  the 
control of the provider. We need to move forward from this point and I am confident 
that  the  Commission,  with  Congressional  oversight,  will  manage  compliance  with 
their requirements reasonably. 

I suggest that the Congress clarify to the Commission that IP-enabled voice serv-
ices, including VoIP services, are telecommunications services and should be treated 
like  other  voice  services.  The  clear  meaning  and  intent  of  the  Telecommunications 
Act  of  1996  was  to  have  similar  services  treated  in  similar  ways.  The  Congress 
needs  to  rein  in  the  Commission’s  efforts  to  find  escape  hatches  out  of  the  statute. 
The problem of VoIP service being provided without access to E–911 is a necessary 
outgrowth of the definitional gamesmanship environment that has been fostered by 
the Commission since the enactment of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 

Furthermore,  it  was  the  unwillingness  of  the  Commission  to  classify  VoIP  as  a 
telecommunications service that became the grounds for assertion that the Commis-
sion was unable to ensure that VoIP providers could access the selective routers and 
emergency communications systems they need to access to provide 9-1-1 and E–911 
service.  The  Commission  left  this  important  step  up  to  voluntary  negotiations 
among  industry  segments.  S.  1063,  however,  does  address  this  specific  issue  of  re-
quiring access to the selective routers and emergency communications systems con-
trolled by incumbent companies. As I alluded to earlier, this is one of the provisions 
of  this  legislation  which  makes  the  enactment  of  this  measure  necessary  to  ensure 
9-1-1 and E–911 access over IP-enabled systems. 

I would suggest that either in S. 1063 or other telecommunications legislation con-
sidered  by  this  Committee,  that  you  address  this  classification  problem  that  is  un-
dermining  key  social  covenants  that  many  Americans  have  come  to  expect  in  mod-
ern  day  life—such  as  access  to  9-1-1  and  E–911  service.  I  am  by  no  means  sug-
gesting  that  IP-enabled  services  be  subjected  to  the  whole  range  of  regulatory  obli-
gations of traditional telephone service. Many of these requirements may not be nec-
essary.  The  FCC  has  the  tools  under  the  forbearance  authority  contained  in  the 
statute  to  ensure  the  new,  innovative  services  such  as  VoIP  are  not  smothered  in 
unnecessary regulations. But, there are some necessary regulations and in my judg-
ment,  access  to  emergency  communications  services  such  as  E–911  is  one  of  these 
necessities.  New  services  such  as  VoIP  will  fare  much  better  in  the  marketplace  if 
the  regulatory  requirements  are  clear  from  the  start.  The  current  circumstance  is 
an  environment  of  uncertainty.  This  is  far  more  constraining  on  innovation  than  a 
clear regulatory environment where providers can have a clear sense of their obliga-
tions and requirements. 
Conclusion 

Thank  you  again,  Senator  Burns,  for  inviting  me  to  testify.  More  importantly, 
thank  you  for  your  leadership.  You  have  truly  been  the  leading  voice  in  the  U.S. 
Senate in advancing E–911. A great deal of progress has been made, in part directly 
from  your  efforts,  and  the  public  safety  community  and  the  industry  have  shared 
praise of your efforts. 

I would be happy to respond to any questions.
Senator BURNS. Thank you very much. Now we go to Mr. George 
Heinrichs,  who  is  CEO  and  Chairman  of  Intrado.  Thank  you  for 
coming.

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

22

STATEMENT OF GEORGE HEINRICHS, PRESIDENT AND CEO, 

INTRADO 

Mr.  HEINRICHS.  Thank  you,  Senator  Burns.  I’m  George 
Heinrichs, the CEO of Intrado. We are a provider of the core infra-
structure  of  our  Nation’s  emergency  network.  I’ve  been  privileged 
to work with you on 9-1-1 issues for many years, and in fact, I first 
testified  before  you  in  the  Senate  Communications  Subcommittee 
in  May  of  1989  when  you  convened  a  hearing  on  the  original  E–
911  bill,  which  required  that  9-1-1  be  the  universal  number  for 
emergency calls over cell phones. 

Fortunately, the Wireless Communications and Public Safety Act 
of 1999, which you authored, passed into law. I have no doubt that 
many  lives  have  been  saved  by  this  commonsense  piece  of  legisla-
tion. 

Thank you for inviting to me to testify today on the critical topic 
of  bringing  lifesaving  enhanced  9-1-1  capabilities  to  the  increas-
ingly  important  area  of  Voice  Over  Internet  Protocol  services.  I 
would also like to take the opportunity to acknowledge the tireless 
efforts  of  my  colleagues,  who  are  also  here  to  testify  regarding  na-
tional concerns, namely David Jones of NENA, Wanda McCarley of 
APCO,  Greg  Rohde  of  the  E–911  Institute,  and  Jeffrey  Citron  of 
Vonage. Their leadership and countless hours of work have signifi-
cantly contributed to furthering emergency services in our country. 
It’s  truly  a  team  effort,  and  I’m  proud  during  my  career  to  have 
served  as  a  call  taker,  an  EMS  responder,  and  a  law  enforcement 
officer,  and  today  my  role  is  in  service  to  a  much  larger  constitu-
ency, as the primary provider of the Nation’s underlying 9-1-1 tech-
nology. 

Senator Burns, you’ve long been a champion of 9-1-1 issues, and 
have  shown  both  a  tremendous  passion  and  an  effective  advocacy 
for creating strong coalitions that have resulted in lifesaving legis-
lation. 

I should add that the location of today’s hearing in your beautiful 
state  of  Montana  is  particularly  appropriate,  for  rural  states  have 
the challenge of dealing with vast distances that make efficient and 
universal  emergency  communications  all  the  more  important,  and 
absolutely vital for citizens. 

Unfortunately,  many  rural  states  suffer  in  this  regard  without 
the  leadership  and  resources  of  your  home  state.  Furthermore,  as 
Montana  is  currently  in  the  grip  of  the  fire  season,  threats  to  the 
public  safety  highlight  the  constant  need  to  attend  to  the  state’s 
emergency communications infrastructure. 

In  your  capacity  as  a  champion  of  9-1-1  issues  in  the  Senate, 
your  efforts  have  been  relentless  in  seizing  any  opportunity  to  up-
grade our Nation’s critical emergency networks. 

Most  recently,  the  public  safety  community  was  particularly  im-
pressed at the act of political leadership displayed on the final day 
of  the  108th  Congress,  by  simply  refusing  to  allow  the  Senate  to 
go out of session until the ENHANCE 9-1-1 Act of 2004, which you 
authored,  was  passed.  While  it  was  the  very  last  bill  of  the  108th 
Congress,  it  is  also  among  the  most  important,  as  the  bill  author-
ized  $1.25  billion  for  upgrades  of  public  safety  answering  points 
across the country so that 9-1-1 callers could be accurately located. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

23

Unlike  so  many  issues  before  Congress,  9-1-1  is  truly  bipartisan 
in  nature,  which  you  showed  by  reaching  across  the  aisle  to  team 
with  Senator  Clinton  in  creating  the  9-1-1  caucus.  In  the  little 
more  than  two  years  since  its  creation,  the  E–911  caucus  has  rap-
idly transformed into a key national policy forum where the public 
safety community musters support for lifesaving initiatives. 

Just  as  you  showed  great  vision  in  moving  forward  on  bringing 
critical  9-1-1  services  to  cell  phones,  you  recognized  early  on  that 
as VoIP services began to grow in popularity, lifesaving 9-1-1 capa-
bilities remain an essential aspect of telecommunications service to 
all Americans. 

Last summer, you authored the Burns amendment to VoIP legis-
lation being considered in the Senate Commerce Committee, which 
required  9-1-1  services  to  be  offered  by  VoIP  providers.  You  have 
continued this leadership by championing Senate Bill 1063, the IP-
enabled Voice Communications and Public Safety Act of 2005. 

Before  discussing  the  merits  of  the  legislation,  I  would  first  like 
to provide you with a brief description of Intrado. For over a quar-
ter  of  a  century,  telecommunications  providers,  public  safety  orga-
nizations,  and  government  agencies  have  turned  to  Intrado  for 
communications needs. Founded in 1979, Intrado has built a strong 
reputation  as  an  innovator  in  emergency  communications.  Today 
Intrado  provides  the  core  of  America’s  9-1-1  infrastructure  and  a 
wide range of offerings for safety and mobility markets that include 
9-1-1  data  management,  call  routing  and  subscription  services, 
wireless data services, and notification services. 

Throughout  its  history,  we  have  enthusiastically  participated  in 
bringing  our  experience  and  resources  to  bear  in  the  evolution  of 
America’s  emergency  communications  policy.  The  rapid  growth  of 
wireless  and  Voice  Over  Internet  Protocol  and  alternative  tech-
nologies  present  new  challenges  to  the  current  infrastructure. 
Intrado  products,  services,  and  systems  support  an  estimated  200 
million  9-1-1  calls  a  year,  with  a  growing  percentage  of  these  calls 
coming from wireless and VoIP phones. The Intelligent Emergency 
Network,  which  is  our  next  generation  product,  is  designed  to  ad-
dress and support those changing requirements. 

Turning  our  attention  to  Senate  Bill  1063,  we  would  like  to  ex-
tend  our  full  support  for  this  critical  public  safety  legislation.  Sen-
ator  Burns,  your  leadership  and  commitment  to  ensuring  that  our 
Nation’s  citizens  continue  to  receive  the  emergency  services  they 
need  when  dialing  9-1-1,  regardless  of  the  technology  employed  by 
the  users,  have  been  met  with  much  deserved  and  widespread  ap-
proval of the public safety community. 

In addition, there are vital issues that still need to be addressed 
that  only  Congress  has  the  authority  on  which  to  act.  The  tech-
nology  that  is  required  to  provide  both  fixed  and  nomadic  VoIP 
subscribers with emergency service exists today. However, the nec-
essary  policy  changes  are  not  yet  in  place,  and  both  Congress  and 
the  Federal  Communications  Commission  must  continue  to  work 
together to ensure such changes are made. 

As  such,  we  recommend  the  following  policy  enhancements  that 
will  provide  appropriate  statutory  framework  for  the  delivery  of 
emergency services to all subscribers of IP-enabled services. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

24

The critical matter that still needs to be clarified is exactly what 
types  of  entities  are  afforded  access  to  the  9-1-1  network  in  order 
to reliably deliver the caller’s location and call back number to the 
appropriate  answering  point  when  a  call  is  placed  from  an  IP-en-
abled  device.  Without  minimum  standards  for  access  to  our  Na-
tion’s critical 9-1-1 infrastructure, VoIP service providers operating 
outside  this  country,  or  those  who  are  technically  naive  would  be 
granted  access  to  our  9-1-1  network,  posing  a  significant  threat  to 
homeland security. 

This  is  not  a  theoretical  concern,  as  America  has  already  been 
the  target  of  increasingly  sophisticated  attacks  from  organizations 
of foreign origin on our core emergency information infrastructure, 
and these mirror previous denial of service attacks on the Internet 
at large. 

This is a clear and present danger to the security of our Nation, 
and  must  be  acknowledged  and  prevented.  If  the  9-1-1  network  of 
the  United  States  were  rendered  inoperable,  the  results  could  be 
tragic. 

Let me skip quickly to two other points. One is official standards. 
We  recommend  strongly  that  the  Federal  policy  should  recognize 
the  important  role  of  accredited  standards  organizations,  and 
should  insist  on  adherence  to  9-1-1  standards  developed  within 
those  organizations.  Having  this  policy  measure  will  ensure  that 
appropriate  rules  are  in  place,  and  do  not  hinder  the  deployment 
of VoIP 9-1-1 services. 

Finally,  to  give  our  support  for  liability  protection,  which  we  be-
lieve  is  important  to  provide  the  parity  for  all  of  the  carriers  that 
are providing service in the U.S. Thank you very much. 

[The prepared statement of Mr. Heinrichs follows:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF GEORGE HEINRICHS, PRESIDENT AND CEO, INTRADO INC. 
Senator  Burns,  I  am  George  Heinrichs,  CEO  of  Intrado  Inc.,  the  provider  of  the 
core infrastructure of our Nation’s emergency communications network. I have been 
privileged  to  work  with  you  on  9-1-1  issues  for  many  years.  In  fact,  I  first  testified 
before  you  in  the  Senate  Communications  Subcommittee  in  May  of  1999  when  you 
convened a hearing on the original E–911 bill, which required that 9-1-1 be the uni-
versal number for emergency calls over cell phones. Fortunately, the Wireless Com-
munications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of  1999,  which  you  authored,  passed  into  law. 
I have no doubt that many lives have been saved by this commonsense piece of leg-
islation.  Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  testify  today  on  the  critical  topic  of  bringing 
lifesaving  enhanced  9-1-1  capabilities  to  the  increasingly  important  area  of  Voice 
over Internet Protocol (VoIP) services. 

I would also like to take the opportunity to acknowledge the tireless efforts of my 
colleagues  who  are  also  here  to  testify  regarding  national  concerns,  namely  David 
Jones of NENA, Wanda McCarley of APCO, Greg Rohde of the E–911 Institute and 
Jeffrey Citron of Vonage. Their leadership and countless hours of work have signifi-
cantly  contributed  to  furthering  emergency  services  in  our  country.  It  is  truly  a 
team  effort  and  I  am  proud  during  my  career  to  have  served  as  a  call  taker,  EMS 
responder and law enforcement officer. Today, my role is in service to a much larger 
constituency as the primary provider of our Nation’s 9-1-1 technology. 

Senator  Burns,  you  have  long  been  a  champion  of  9-1-1  issues  and  have  shown 
both a tremendous passion and effective advocacy for creating strong coalitions that 
have resulted in lifesaving legislation. I should add that the location of today’s hear-
ing  in  your  beautiful  state  of  Montana  is  particularly  appropriate,  for  rural  states 
have the challenge of dealing with vast distances that make efficient and universal 
emergency communications all the more important and absolutely vital for their citi-
zens.  Unfortunately,  many  rural  states  suffer  in  this  regard  without  the  leadership 
and resources of your home state. Furthermore, as Montana is currently in the grip 
of the fire season, threats to the public safety highlight the constant need to attend 
to the State’s emergency communications infrastructure. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

25

In  your  capacity  as  a  champion  of  9-1-1  issues  in  the  Senate,  your  efforts  have 
been  relentless  in  seizing  any  opportunity  to  upgrade  our  Nation’s  critical  emer-
gency  communications  networks.  Most  recently,  the  public  safety  community  was 
particularly  impressed  at  the  act  of  political  leadership  you  displayed  on  the  final 
day  of  the  108th  Congress  by  simply  refusing  to  allow  the  Senate  to  go  out  of  ses-
sion  until  the  ENHANCE  911  Act  of  2004,  which  you  authored,  was  passed.  While 
it  was  the  very  last  bill  passed  in  the  108th  Congress,  it  was  also  among  the  most 
important, as the bill authorized $1.25 billion for upgrades to public safety answer-
ing points across the country to allow for 9-1-1 callers to be accurately located. 

Unlike so many issues before Congress, 9-1-1 is truly bipartisan in nature, which 
you  showed  by  reaching  across  the  aisle  to  team  with  Senator  Clinton  in  creating 
the  E–911  Caucus.  In  the  little  more  than  two  years  since  its  creation,  the  E–911 
Caucus  has  rapidly  transformed  into  a  key  national  policy  forum  where  the  public 
safety community musters support for lifesaving initiatives. 

Just as you showed great vision in moving forward on bringing critical 9-1-1 serv-
ices  to  cell  phones,  you  recognized  early  on  that  as  VoIP  services  began  to  grow  in 
popularity,  lifesaving  9-1-1  capabilities  remain  an  essential  aspect  of  telecommuni-
cations  service  to  all  Americans.  Last  summer,  you  offered  the  Burns  amendment 
to  VoIP  legislation  being  considered  in  the  Senate  Commerce  Committee,  which  re-
quired 9-1-1 services to be offered by VoIP providers. You have continued this lead-
ership by championing Senate Bill 1063, the IP-Enabled Voice Communications and 
Public Safety Act of 2005. 

Before  discussing  the  merits  of  this  legislation,  I  would  first  like  to  provide  you 
with  a  brief  description  of  Intrado.  For  over  a  quarter  of  a  century,  telecommuni-
cations providers, public safety organizations and government agencies have turned 
to  Intrado  for  their  communications  needs.  Founded  in  1979,  Intrado  has  built  a 
strong  reputation  as  an  innovator  in  emergency  communications.  Today,  Intrado 
provides the core of North America’s 9-1-1 infrastructure and a wide range of offer-
ings for the safety and mobility markets that includes 9-1-1 data management, call 
routing and subscription services, wireless data services and notification services. 

Throughout  its  history,  Intrado  has  enthusiastically  participated  in  bringing  its 
experience  and  resources  to  bear  in  the  evolution  of  America’s  emergency  commu-
nications  policy  and  infrastructure.  As  9-1-1  has  grown  to  become  an  essential  ele-
ment of telecommunications service, Intrado has played a key role in defining, build-
ing and maintaining our complex emergency communications infrastructure. 

The  rapid  growth  of  wireless  and  Voice  over  Internet  Protocol  communications 
and other alternative technologies presents new challenges to the current infrastruc-
ture.  Intrado  products,  services  and  systems  support  an  estimated  200  million  9-1-
1 calls each year, with a growing percentage of these calls coming from wireless and 
VoIP phones. The Intrado Intelligent Emergency NetworkTM, Intrado’s next genera-
tion,  IP-based  emergency  communications  services  network,  is  designed  to  address 
and support these changing communications requirements. 

Turning  our  attention  to  Senate  Bill  1063,  Intrado  would  like  to  extend  its  full 
support for this critical public safety legislation. Senator Burns, your leadership and 
commitment  to  ensuring  that  our  Nation’s  citizens  continue  to  receive  the  emer-
gency  services  they  need  when  dialing  the  digits  ‘‘9-1-1,’’  regardless  of  the  tech-
nology employed by users, have been met with much-deserved, widespread approval 
in the public safety community. 

In  addition,  there  are  vital  issues  that  still  need  to  be  addressed  that  only  Con-
gress  has  the  authority  on  which  to  act.  The  technology  that  is  required  to  provide 
both fixed and nomadic VoIP subscribers with emergency services exists today; how-
ever,  the  necessary  policy  changes  are  not  yet  in  place,  and  both  Congress  and  the 
Federal  Communications  Commission  must  continue  to  work  together  to  ensure 
such changes are made. 

As such, Intrado proposes the following policy enhancements that will provide the 
appropriate  statutory  framework  for  the  delivery  of  emergency  services  to  all  sub-
scribers of IP-Enabled services: 
Qualified Access to the 9-1-1 Network 

A  critical  matter  that  still  needs  to  be  clarified  is  exactly  what  types  of  entities 
are  afforded  access  into  the  9-1-1  network  in  order  to  reliably  deliver  the  caller’s 
location and call back number to the appropriate Answering Point when a 9-1-1 call 
is placed from an IP-enabled device. Without minimum standards for access into our 
Nation’s  critical  9-1-1  infrastructure,  VoIP  service  providers  operating  outside  of 
this  country  or  those  who  are  technically  naı¨ve  would  be  granted  access  to  the  E–
911  network,  posing  a  significant  threat  to  homeland  security.  This  is  not  a  theo-
retical concern, as America has already been the target of increasingly sophisticated 
attacks  from  organizations  of  foreign  origin  on  our  core  emergency  information  in-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

26

frastructure,  which  mirror  previous  denial  of  service  attacks  on  the  Internet  at 
large. 

This clear and present danger to the security of our Nation must be acknowledged 
and prevented. If the 9-1-1 network of the United States were rendered inoperable, 
the results could be tragic. Clearly, safeguarding our 9-1-1 infrastructure from these 
threats  through  a  minimally  intrusive  qualification  process  is  paramount.  E–911 
service  providers,  who  currently  provide  access  into  the  9-1-1  network,  must  have 
the  technical  acumen  to  ensure  those  providers  gaining  access  are  qualified  and 
meet  an  appropriate  level  of  technical  sophistication  and  security,  for  the  purposes 
of providing E–911 services. The combination of qualified E–911 service provider op-
eration of the secure network connectivity point and some minimal criterion for com-
panies  that  interconnect  with  them  would  ensure  our  Nation’s  future  E–911  net-
work is at least as safe and reliable as today’s 9-1-1 infrastructure. 

Appropriate  policy  measures  should  be  considered  that  provide  a  framework  for 
the  evolution  of  the  9-1-1  network  to  accommodate  future  advancements  in  tele-
communications.  This  should  include  accommodation  or  modification  of  the  current 
9-1-1  network  and  the  setting  of  clear  objectives  to  move  the  U.S.  forward  in  more 
advanced and intelligent communications infrastructures. 
Official Standards 

Federal policy should recognize the important role of accredited standards organi-
zations  and  should  insist  on  adherence  to  9-1-1  standards  developed  within  those 
organizations.  Having  this  policy  measure  will  ensure  that  appropriate  rules  are  in 
place  that  do  not  hinder  the  deployment  of  VoIP  9-1-1  services  across  the  country 
and  are  in  line  with  this  current  technology.  Legacy  deployment  practices  will  not 
work in this new IP environment and reliance on such will only slow down a nation-
wide rollout of emergency services. 
Liability Protection 

Given that only Congress can assign liability protection to IP-Enabled service pro-
viders,  it  is  imperative  that  Federal  legislation  is  enacted  to  ensure  this  provision 
becomes a Federal mandate. Congress must grant VoIP providers the same liability 
protection  and  immunity  as  dictated  by  the  States—much  like  you  did  for  wireless 
carriers under the original Burns E–911 bill, the Wireless Communications and Pri-
vacy  Act  of  1999.  In  order  for  the  IP-Enabled  Service  Providers  to  obtain  liability 
protection,  they  will  need  to  meet  certain  criteria  so  that  the  integrity  of  the  9-1-
1 network is not placed in jeopardy. In addition, it is important that liability protec-
tion  be  extended  to  third-party  providers,  vendors  and  agents  of  these  IP-Enabled 
Service Providers. 

As  VoIP  services  become  ever  more  popular  among  Americans,  our  Nation’s  tele-
communications  policy  must  keep  pace  with  this  development.  One  key  aim  of  pol-
icymakers when creating the proper regulatory structure of VoIP technology should 
be  the  preservation  of  our  Nation’s  critical  E–911  information  infrastructure.  You 
have  shown  your  leadership  in  the  national  policy  arena  by  sponsoring  vital  public 
safety  legislation  which  is  balanced,  far-reaching  and  has  been  met  with  enthusi-
astic support. By enacting policy that addresses the aforementioned issues, Congress 
will not only preserve the integrity and reliability of the 9-1-1 network, but will also 
achieve  its  goal  of  providing  the  policy  framework  required  to  ensure  all  users  of 
IP-Enabled  services  have  access  to  full  E–911  emergency  services.  Again,  Intrado 
thanks  you  for  your  well-considered,  commonsense  legislation  and  supports  its  pas-
sage by the Congress in rapid fashion. 

Finally,  I  am  pleased  to  see  Michael  Brown,  the  Under  Secretary  of  the  Depart-
ment of Homeland Security in attendance and would like to extend my appreciation 
to him for all of his work in bridging the gap between emergency services and home-
land security. The Under Secretary’s understanding of the real threats facing Amer-
ica’s communities is a credit to him and to this administration. Creating and main-
taining the best emergency communications network in the world is a constant chal-
lenge and is truly a collaborative effort. 

Thank  you  again  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  here  today.  I  would  be  more  than 

happy to answer any questions you may have.

Senator  BURNS.  Thank  you,  and  thank  all  of  you  for  your  testi-
mony  today.  I’ve  seen  it  written  up  in  the  communications  papers 
and  communications  that  being  as  the  FCC  has  passed  this  order, 
further legislation needed? I’ll start with you, Mr. Rohde. 

Mr. ROHDE. Yes, Senator, I believe it is, for a number of reasons 
which I just outlined. One is I do think it’s important to make the 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

27

requirement  a  statutory  requirement,  not  simply  a  regulatory  re-
quirement. For that reason alone, you should pass legislation. 

I also think—and the other panelists have said the same thing—
that  the  liability  parity  provision  is  necessary.  The  liability  immu-
nity  you  provide  for  wireless  E–911  services  and  landline  9-1-1 
services should apply to VoIP services. 

Third  is  the  provision  of—the  FCC  chose  not  to  assert  authority 
to  require  that  VoIP  providers  have  access  to  the  emerging  infra-
structure  that  local  exchange  carriers  control,  such  as  selected 
routers.  So  since  the  FCC  did  not  make  that  a  requirement,  Con-
gress really has to step in and make that requirement. 

So for those three reasons alone, that legislation is necessary. 
Senator BURNS. Mr. Citron. 
Mr.  CITRON.  We  would  agree  wholeheartedly  that  those  items 
just  recognized  be  included  in  Congressional  mandates.  I  want  to 
make  one  additional  comment  that  was  made  during  the  previous 
testimony, and that that is our Nation’s network of E–911 is really 
a  patchwork  quilt  of  6,000  different  sets  of  standards,  and  a  na-
tional  standard  should  be  created,  and  9-1-1  should  be  treated  as 
a national asset, not as something that is incredibly local, and can 
deviate  freely,  depending  on  the  service  areas  being  currently  cov-
ered by 9-1-1. 

Senator BURNS. Do you want to comment on that, George? 
Mr. HEINRICHS. We’re not in Washington. I’ll just keep the word 

short. 

istic date? 

Senator BURNS. Wanda. 
Ms.  MCCARLEY.  I  think  most  assuredly  there’s  more  work  to  be 
done,  and  Congress  has  a  role  in  that.  To  just  reiterate,  I’ll  just 
ditto  Greg’s  comments.  The  items  that  he’s  outlined  are  excellent 
examples  of  the  role  that  Congress  could  take  in  forwarding  these 
goals. 

Senator  BURNS.  How  realistic  is  November  28th?  Is  that  a  real-

Mr. CITRON. I guess as the one here who was responsible for re-
leasing  the  service  throughout  the  entire  United  States  by  that 
deadline, we suspect that we will get the majority of our customers 
online  well  within  that  time  period.  I  think  it’s  going  to  be  chal-
lenging  to  get  every  single  customer  on  in  that  period.  Getting  ac-
cess to underlying facilities, just the timeline of testing is quite dif-
ficult. I’m sure that APCO and NENA represent their constituents, 
but  we  need  to  test  and  implement  the  solution  with  hundreds  of 
selective routers, and literally implement 6,000 PSAPs. 

We  think  that  to  go  out  and  rush  to  get  it  online  when  it’s  not 
been  properly  tested  and  give  the  fail  safe  protections  and  stand-
ards necessary is difficult. With that said, we’ll, of course, move as 
fast as possible, get as many people as quickly as possible, irrespec-
tive of any deadline set by the FCC. 

Senator BURNS. Should the FCC be pretty flexible on this?
Mr.  CITRON.  We  think  the  FCC  should  look  at  what  the  service 
providers  are  doing  on  an  individual  case-by-case  basis.  Providers 
are working diligently and hard getting this rolled out. They should 
provide the flexibility and comment on necessary time lines, too. 

Senator  BURNS.  You  know  we  have  challenges  of  getting  this 
done.  Is  it  the  technology?  What  kind  of  challenges,  what  are  you 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

running 
instrumenting E–911 and Voice Over IP? 

into  out  there  that  would  slow  the  progress  of 

28

Nobody? 

Mr.  CITRON.  I  think  there  are  a  lot  of  challenges.  The  first  for 
starters is identifying every selected router in the country we need 
to hook into, because there is no such mandated list maintained by 
any  Federal  or  state  authority.  So  we  don’t  even  know  all  the 
things  we  need  to  do.  We’re  still  finding  every  single—APCO,  and 
NENA,  and  Intrado  are  great  partners—in  trying  to  identify  those 
access points. 

Even  beyond  that,  accessing  those  elements,  having  to  negotiate 
commercial  agreements,  interconnect  with  those  relationships, 
without  any  standards  made  available,  requires  us  to  literally  sit 
down  with  every  single  operator  and  owner,  and  explain  to  them 
how  this  solution  is  going  to  work,  and  to  customize  that  solution, 
because  there  are  no  standards  for  local  communications.  Beyond 
that, the testing with PSAPs takes a quite a bit of time. And every-
body has got a little bit of a different view. 

So  I  think  there  are  a  lot  of  challenges  out  there,  and  only  time 
and  the  dedication  of  all  the  people  at  this  table  are  going  to  be 
required to make this work. 

Senator  BURNS.  Would  you  like  to  comment  on  that  question? 

Mr.  HEINRICHS.  Senator,  I  would  suggest  that  I  think  the 
timeline is unreasonable in the sense that it’s unprecedented in the 
history of 9-1-1. If you look at the history of rolling out wireless in 
the United States, it was measured in a matter of years or decades 
actually.  If  you  look  at  wireless,  we’ve  worked  together  on  this  for 
a long time, and we’re still working on that. 

One  Hundred  and  Twenty-days  certainly  provided  a  lot  of  moti-
vation  for  a  lot  of  people  working  very  hard.  I  think  when  we  get 
to  the  end  of  that,  they’ll  see  the  fruits  of  their  labor,  and  it  will 
be  good,  but  it’s  not  going  to  be  100  percent.  I  think  it’s  clear  to 
me right now from where I sit that this will not be nationwide and 
complete by that deadline. 

Senator  BURNS.  I’ve  looked  at  the  wireless  thing,  and  also  on 
Voice  Over  IP,  and  that’s  the  reason  I  asked  the  flexibility  ques-
tion.  I’d  hate  to  see  the  FCC  go  and  fine  people  or  anything  like 
this  before  they  get  it  done.  There  are  challenges  out  there,  some 
challenges that we didn’t have in 9-1-1, to be honest with you. But 
I still think it’s important. 

We  had  testimony  of  many—of  instances  where  9-1-1  wasn’t  an-
swered  and  something  very  bad  happened.  So  we’re  very  much—
I  would  like  to  stay  in  the  circle  on  all  of  you—especially  you,  Mr. 
Citron,  because  of  your  experience  with  trying  to  put  9-1-1  into 
Voice  Over  IP—challenges  that  might  arise  that  we  don’t  think  of. 
And just to stay in it, as we put this technology out there, and try 
to force it out. 

As  you  know,  sometimes  the  marketplace  does  it  faster  than 
Congress  or  deadlines  can  do  it,  but  sometimes  I  always  have  the 
feeling that the market should really force a lot of this, and would 
do a better job. 

Mr.  CITRON.  In  addition  to  the  challenges  that  I’ve  already  out-
lined,  there  are  others  that  do  concern  us.  We  think  that  the  FCC 
has  done  a  great  job  in  really  moving  the  ball  forward.  We  tried 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

29

to deploy E–911 for a very long time, and Intrado worked very hard 
with  us  on  issues;  and  without  getting  the  underlying  access,  it 
was nearly impossible, and only with the help of the FCC interven-
tion have Bell Operating Companies and owners of the 9-1-1 infra-
structure started to let us get access. 

But the FCC has other policies that do concern us, and may come 
up  to  hurt  us  in  a  bad  way,  and  that  is  clearly  the  FCC  has  man-
dated that if 9-1-1 service can’t be provided, that service be discon-
tinued  to  a  user.  And  as  users  of  nomadic  Voice  Over  IP  services 
move  around,  it’s  quite  possible  that  a  user  will  move  around  to  a 
location,  will  type  in  his  new  location,  and  then  the  service  will  of 
course stop working, and then that will force the user to potentially 
select  a  different  market  where  9-1-1  is  currently  available,  thus 
causing misrouting of calls, and we find that to be a very large con-
cern. 

Senator BURNS. Do you find that the responsibility is going to be 
just as much on the user as it is on you folks who provide the serv-
ice? 

Mr. CITRON. Yes. 
Senator  BURNS.  That’s  the  conclusion  I  drew,  too.  We  thank  you 
for your testimony today. And as we move this legislation forward, 
let’s keep the communication lines open, and let us know the chal-
lenges you run into, and to make it work, and make it fair. Thank 
you for your testimony. 

We  go  to  the  second  panel  today,  which  is  made  up  of  Jeremy 
Ferkin,  General  Manager  of  CenturyTel;  Jeff  Brandt,  Director, 
Montana  Department  of  Administration;  Bill  Squires,  Blackfoot 
Telecommunications  Group;  and  Chairman  Greg  Jergeson,  Mon-
tana  Public  Service  Commission.  So  we  welcome  all  of  you.  Have 
we got a change here? 

Ms.  KELLY.  I’m  Jeff  Brandt  today.  Janet  Kelly,  Director  of  the 

Department. 

Senator BURNS. Yes. Okay. And again, we would like to have you 
kind  of  keep  your  testimony  down  to  five  minutes,  and  your  full 
statement and anything that you want to put in the record will be 
received at this time. 

And  Ms.  Kelly,  since  you’re  the  stand-in,  you  get  to  lead  off 

today.

STATEMENT OF JANET KELLY, DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF 

ADMINISTRATION, STATE OF MONTANA 

Ms.  KELLY.  Senator  Burns,  thank  you  so  much  for  providing  me 
with the opportunity to appear before you today. My name is Janet 
Kelly.  I’m  the  Director  of  the  Department  of  Administration.  And 
I’m appearing today on behalf of the State of Montana because the 
Department  of  Administration  has  responsibility  for  managing  the 
statewide 9-1-1 program. 

The  State  of  Montana  supports  Senate  Bill  1063  because  it  ad-
dresses  a  number  of  our  concerns,  and  supports  our  efforts  to  pro-
vide  the  highest  quality  public  safety  services  to  the  citizens  of 
Montana.  I  would  like  to  thank  Senator  Nelson  for  sponsoring  the 
bill,  and  Senators  Clinton,  Kerry,  Snowe,  and  Burns,  co-sponsors. 
Senator  Burns,  you  have  been  a  leader  on  this  issue,  not  only 
here  in  Montana,  but  throughout  the  Nation.  9-1-1  services,  let 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

30

alone  public  safety  technology,  are  not  plug-and-play  operations. 
There  have  been  exciting  advances  in  communications  technology 
that provide our citizens with greater choice and capabilities. 

However,  we  must  be  sure  that  the  deployment  of  these  new 
technologies  does  not  interfere  with  our  ability  to  provide  impor-
tant public safety services. The technology landscape is ever-chang-
ing,  and  Senate  Bill  1063  will  help  ensure  that  public  safety  serv-
ices  will  be  available  to  all  citizens,  regardless  of  their  choice  of 
technology. 

Technological  advances  will  continue  to  create  new  issues  and 
challenges  as  businesses  offer  new  services  to  our  citizens.  There-
fore, additional legislation, regulation, and standards may be need-
ed to be sure that our citizens are adequately served, and that the 
public  safety  community  needs  to  have  a  place  and  a  voice  at  that 
table. 

Montana is among the handful of states that has attained state-
wide basic 9-1-1. However, our citizens, even those living in remote 
areas,  expect  enhanced  9-1-1,  and  we  met  the  challenge  of  deploy-
ing  E–911  solutions  across  our  state  by  the  9-1-1  program  office 
collaborating  with  the  Montana  Sheriffs  and  Peace  Officers  Asso-
ciation; and with the assistance of a Federal appropriation in fiscal 
year  2003,  we  have  a  statewide  E–911  network  project  underway. 
Montana’s 9-1-1 program is successful because of the cooperation 
among  legislators,  regulators,  state  and  local  government  adminis-
trators, and the telephone industry; and our future success will re-
quire  continued  cooperation  to  solve  the  problems  created  by  the 
new  technologies  and  conditions  that  will  impact  the  public  safety 
community. 

Voice Over IP creates new opportunities and new challenges, and 
I will address these from the State of Montana’s perspective. First, 
we need to safeguard the ability of Montanans to pay for the deliv-
ery of public safety services across our vast state. 

Montana  is  concerned  with  the  potential  for  unfunded  mandates 
that  would  impact  our  ability  to  update  and  maintain  our  infra-
structure.  We  want  to  be  sure  that  we’re  able  to  continue  to  work 
in  enhancing  existing  technology,  rather  than  having  to  deal  with 
planned  obsolescence  or  incompatible  technologies.  As  the  tech-
nology evolves, it must not interfere with the public’s access to crit-
ical public safety services. 

Today’s  hearing  reinforces  the  importance  of  the  industry,  Con-
gress, and the public safety community working together, and I ap-
plaud  the  Committee’s  commitment  and  continued  support  of  pub-
lic safety in this country. The State of Montana is working on solu-
tions,  and  embracing  the  new  technology  for  public  safety,  and  we 
stand  ready  to  assist  you  in  any  way  we  can  to  make  our  Nation 
safer. Thank you. 

[The prepared statement of Ms. Kelly follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF JANET KELLY, DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF 

ADMINISTRATION, STATE OF MONTANA 

Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, Senator Burns, thank you very much 
for  providing  me  with  this  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today.  My  name  is 
Janet  Kelly,  and  I  am  the  Director  of  the  Department  of  Administration  for  the 
State of Montana. I am appearing today on behalf of the State of Montana because 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

31

the Department of Administration has responsibility for managing Montana’s State-
wide 9-1-1 Program. 

The State of Montana offers its support for the IP-Enabled Voice Communications 
and  Public  Safety  Act  of  2005  (S.  1063).  This  bill  addresses  a  number  of  concerns 
I will identify and supports our efforts in providing the highest quality public safety 
services to the citizens of Montana. 

Mr.  Chairman,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  Senator  Nelson  for 
sponsoring  this  bill  and  to  Senators  Clinton,  Kerry,  Snowe  and  Burns,  its  cospon-
sors.  Senator  Burns  has  been  a  leader  on  this  issue,  not  only  here  in  Montana  but 
throughout  the  Nation.  For  example,  in  1999  he  sponsored  the  Wireless  Commu-
nications  and  Public  Safety  Act,  an  important  roadmap  for  deploying  wireless  9-1-
1. 

9-1-1  services,  let  alone  public  safety  technology,  are  not  a  ‘‘plug  and  play’’  oper-
ation. There have been exciting advances in communications technology that provide 
our  citizens  with  greater  choice  and  capabilities.  But  we  must  ensure  that  the  de-
ployment  of  these  new  technologies  doesn’t  interfere  with  the  ability  to  provide  im-
portant public safety services. Furthermore, the technology landscape is ever-chang-
ing.  We  must  maintain  vigilance  so  that  critical  public  safety  services  continue  to 
be  provided  as  technology  evolves.  The  legislation  that  Senator  Burns  and  others 
have  sponsored  will  be  a  valuable  tool  in  ensuring  that  public  safety  services  will 
be available to all citizens, regardless of their choice of technology. 

Undoubtedly,  technological  advances  will  create  new  issues  and  challenges  as 
businesses offer new services to citizens. Legislation, regulations and standards may 
be  needed  to  ensure  the  citizen  is  adequately  served.  The  public  safety  community, 
in particular, needs to have a place and a voice at that table. 

The  challenge  of  keeping  pace  with  technology,  let  alone  responding  to  the  chal-
lenges that have been dropped on the doorstep of our 9-1-1 Public Safety Answering 
Points  (PSAPs),  is  a  daunting  task.  In  addition,  we  have  limitations  in  our  respec-
tive  jurisdictions  as  to  our  authority  and  ability  to  enforce  the  rules.  With  limited 
funds  and  a  small  population  spread  across  a  vast  state,  we  knew  we  had  to  work 
together. So in Montana we collaborated with local, state and Federal partners. 

In  2002,  the  Governor’s  office  created  the  Public  Safety  Services  Bureau  in  the 
Department  of  Administration.  The  Public  Safety  Services  Bureau  manages  the 
State’s  9-1-1  Program  and  statewide  planning  of  public  safety  radio  communica-
tions. 

Montana  is  among  the  handful  of  states  that  have  attained  statewide  basic  9-1-
1  service,  but  the  public,  even  in  remote  areas,  expects  enhanced  9-1-1  service. 
When  faced  with  the  challenge  of  deploying  E–911  solutions  across  the  State,  the 
9-1-1 Program office collaborated with the Montana Sheriff’s and Peace Officers’ As-
sociation, and, with the assistance of a FY03 Federal appropriation, a statewide E–
911  network  project  is  underway.  Montana’s  9-1-1  program  is  successful  because  of 
the  cooperation  among  legislators,  regulators,  state  and  local  government  adminis-
trators  and  the  telephone  industry.  Our  future  success  will  require  continued  co-
operation  to  solve  the  problems  caused  by  new  technology  and  conditions  that  will 
impact the public safety community. 

Now we turn our attention to VoIP. Like most technologies, it creates new oppor-
tunities but also new challenges. I applaud the bill sponsors for tackling these new 
challenges. I will address these challenges from the State of Montana’s perspective. 
First,  we  need  to  safeguard  the  ability  for  Montanans  to  pay  for  the  delivery  of 
public  safety  services  across  Montana’s  vast  territory.  We  are  concerned  with  the 
potential for unfunded mandates that would impact our ability to update and main-
tain our infrastructure. 

We  want  to  be  sure  that  we  will  be  able  to  continue  to  work  to  enhance  existing 
technology  rather  than  having  to  deal  with  planned  obsolescence  or  incompatible 
technologies. 

We want to be sure that our citizens continue to have access to public safety serv-
ices.  As  technology  evolves,  it  must  not  interfere  with  the  public’s  access  to  critical 
public safety services. 

This  hearing  today  reinforces  the  importance  of  the  industry,  Congress  and  the 
public  safety  community  working  together,  and  I  applaud  the  Committee’s  commit-
ment, efforts and continued support of public safety in this country. 

The State of Montana is working on solutions and embracing the new technology 
for  public  safety;  and  we  stand  ready  to  assist  you  in  any  way  we  can  to  make  our 
Nation safer. 
Thank you.
Senator  BURNS.  Thank  you  for  your  testimony.  We’ll  hear  from 

Mr. Jeremy Ferkin, General Manager of CenturyTel. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

32

STATEMENT OF JEREMY FERKIN, GENERAL MANAGER, 

CENTURYTEL, INC. 

Mr.  FERKIN.  Thank  you,  Senator.  We  are  pleased  to  be  the—as 
the State so-called it—the one throat to choke providing the E–911 
services  for  the  state  of  Montana.  As  our  testimony  has  been  sub-
mitted, and questions you’ve asked, I’ll get right to the issues that 
really speak to the heart of S. 1063, and also the issues that we’re 
focused on. 

Liability  is  the  number  one  paramount  issue  we’ve  had  to  deal 
with  negotiating  with  the  State  of  Montana,  and  is  also  the  issue 
that  we  face  in  the  26  states  we  serve  across  the  United  States. 
There’s a patchwork of liability issues throughout the country, and 
we  believe,  like  NENA,  like  the  other  testimony  that  you  received, 
it’s the first issue that we really think needs to be addressed. 

Limitation  of  liability  isn’t  a  balloon  management  issue.  You 
don’t squeeze it in one area, and it pops out, and someone else has 
the liability over here. It is a matter of who is going to put money 
forward,  and  who  is  going  to  be  willing  to  step  out  and  be  a  dif-
ferent  company,  and  just  say  that  this  is  bigger  than  any  one  per-
son’s  event.  9-1-1  is  that  event  we  all  have  to  be  concerned  about. 
So the other side of it is we know that Voice Over Internet is not 
a technology issue. We heard Mr. Citron and everybody else speak 
too. The technology is not the problem with implementing. The re-
lationships,  and  negotiation,  and  navigation  is  where  the  issues 
typically happen. 

That’s not dissimilar to what we experience in the state of Mon-
tana,  with  all  the  different  PSAPs,  all  the  different  vested  entities 
in  this.  So  I  don’t  know  that  it’s  legislation,  but  we  do  know  that 
relationships  are  the  key  to  making  this  happen.  As  Montanans, 
we  all  know  that  if  you  know  people,  you  know  how  to  get  stuff 
done. 

The  other  part  of  S.  1063  that  we  believe  is  critically  important 
is  the  transition  period  that  the  FCC  put  out  there.  I’m  glad  to 
hear  that  Mr.  Citron  believes  that  the  time  line  is  semi-satisfac-
tory.  We  believe  that  there  are  implications  to  E–911  implementa-
tion on IP that possibly are not thought of long term. 

For instance, what if IP isn’t the underlying protocol that’s going 
to  be  used  five  years,  ten  years  from  now?  So  whatever  legislation 
goes  on  needs  to  address  further  technologies  and  further  applica-
tions  that  may  be  out  there,  whether  it’s  SIP  (phonetic)  based, 
which is the newest, latest, greatest thing that we talked about, or 
whether  it’s  neural  implants,  we  don’t  know.  But  technology  will 
change. 

The  additional  focus  S.  1063  addresses,  but  does  not  fully  ad-
dress, is the compensation side of what’s going to happen. So if we 
are  required  to  open  up  access,  that  access  is  going  to  put  more 
costs on whoever is providing those 9-1-1 services. That funding, as 
was  spoken  about  earlier,  where  does  that  come  from?  That  addi-
tional  expense,  is  that  borne  by  us?  If  so,  does  it  negate  or  does 
it  require  us  to  actually  not  want  to  be  a  9-1-1  service  provider? 
That  would  be  a  catastrophic  event,  to  have  people  who  are  step-
ping  out  to  provide  the  service,  being  encumbered,  to  have  to  pay 
for service that they don’t benefit in any way from. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

33

We also believe that, as we talked about, the liability issues. But 
some general issues that are out there, is if you’re on the network, 
if  you’re  utilizing  the  network,  compensation  is  the  biggest  issue. 
So  they  boil  down  to  two  issues.  Liability  is  the  biggest  issue;  and 
then compensation for how do we fund it, and how do we navigate 
it for those who own that infrastructure. 

[The prepared statement of Mr. Ferkin follows:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF JEREMY FERKIN, GENERAL MANAGER, CENTURYTEL, INC. 
Senator  Burns  and  Members  of  the  Committee,  thank  you  very  much  for  pro-
viding  me  with  this  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today.  My  name  is  Jeremy 
Ferkin, and I am General Manager for CenturyTel operations in Kalispell, Montana. 
I am pleased to have this opportunity to discuss Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP), 
its  implications  for  Emergency  9-1-1  (E–911)  and,  more  specifically,  the  Senate  E–
911  bill  entitled  ‘‘IP-Enabled  Voice  Communications  and  Public  Safety  Act  of  2005’’ 
(S. 1063). 

CenturyTel serves more than 63,000 customers in the Flathead Valley of Montana 
and  was  recently  selected  to  be  the  9-1-1  provider  for  the  state.  In  addition  to  our 
Montana operations, CenturyTel is also a national telecommunications company and 
a  leading  provider  of  broadband  services  in  rural  America.  We  are  a  leading  pro-
vider  of  telecommunications  services  in  26  states  that  include  many  of  the  states 
represented  by  Members  of  this  Committee  including  Montana,  Texas,  Mississippi, 
Nevada,  Oregon,  Louisiana,  Washington,  Arizona  and  Arkansas.  We  specialize  in 
providing  high  quality  telephone,  long  distance,  Internet,  broadband,  satellite  and 
advanced  services  in  rural  and  small  urban  markets.  Today,  CenturyTel  is  the 
eighth largest telephone company in the United States with 2.3 million access lines. 
Much of CenturyTel’s recent growth has come from the acquisition of telephone lines 
from  the  larger  Bell  Operating  Companies  in  multiple  states.  The  majority  of  our 
3 million customers and 7,000 employees live and work in the very areas that have 
the most critical stake in the issue we will discuss today. 
Voice Over Internet Protocol 

CenturyTel is excited about the introduction of IP-enabled services in the market-
place  and  about  deploying  new  technologies  and  creating  new  services  for  our  cus-
tomers and communities. CenturyTel already offers IP-based services to many of our 
business  customers  across  the  country.  That  said,  CenturyTel  believes  an  appro-
priate transition period will be required for full-scale delivery of IP-enabled services 
to all Americans. Related, but critical, features such as law enforcement capabilities 
and  access  to  emergency  services  must  be  readily  available  and  tested  because  of 
the technical aspects and dynamics of IP technology. 

VoIP  is  an  example  of  even  better  things  to  come,  as  our  industry  increasingly 
integrates with the computer hardware, software, and entertainment sectors. Inter-
net  Protocol  is  blowing  the  voice  market  wide  open,  allowing  a  variety  of  providers 
to serve ‘‘some’’ business and residential customers. I say ‘‘some customers’’ because, 
that  VoIP  service  will  not  work  unless  a  facilities-based  provider  like  CenturyTel 
or  the  local  cable  company  has  made  the  network  investment  required  to  enable  a 
broadband connection that VoIP needs to work properly. 

CenturyTel  and  companies  like  it  are  building  rural  America’s  broadband  net-
work. Building robust rural networks requires expertise, commitment, access to cap-
ital  and  substantial  investment—all  without  the  assurance  of  a  high  density  cus-
tomer base to make a business case. While CenturyTel only averages 14 access lines 
per square mile and seventy-five percent of our customers are residential, more than 
seventy percent of our customers nationwide have access to CenturyTel DSL. In the 
State  of  Montana  alone,  almost  ninety-six  percent  of  CenturyTel’s  sixty-three  thou-
sand  access  lines  are  DSL-enabled,  and  a  significant  portion  of  our  one  hundred 
fifty-six  million  dollar  total  investment  went  towards  deployment  of  broadband  to 
enable  advanced  services.  Advanced  communications  networks  like  ours  are  the 
foundation  for  realizing  the  promise  of  IP-enabled  services  like  switched  digital 
video  and  other  new  services  yet  to  emerge.  Quite  simply,  you  can’t  deliver  the 
promise of IP without a high capacity network. 

Without question, the further integration of IP-enabled services as a telecommuni-
cations  alternative  offers  both  challenges  and  opportunities  for  local  telecommuni-
cations  companies.  We  have  adapted  to  a  new  world  of  rapid-paced  innovation  and 
intense  competition  from  a  wide  variety  of  players.  Equally  true,  this  new  reality 
is  forcing  fundamental  shifts  in  our  industry—from  proposed  mega-mergers  to  the 
new  services  and  choices  our  companies  are  rolling  out.  Now,  the  Nation’s  commu-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

34

nications  policy  must  adapt  as  well.  Since  we  have  barely  scratched  the  surface  of 
broadband’s potential to produce a whole new generation of innovative applications, 
I appreciate knowing that this Committee has proposed to write policies that broad-
ly encourage network investment and product innovation far beyond first-generation 
VoIP. 
Importance of E–911 Capabilities for IP-Enabled Services 

AT&T  first  made  ‘‘9-1-1’’  available  nationally  for  wireline  access  to  emergency 
services  in  1965,  and  since  that  time,  the  American  public’s  dependence  on  9-1-1 
service  has  continued  to  increase.  The  National  Emergency  Number  Association 
(NENA)  estimates  that  some  form  of  9-1-1  service  is  available  to  99  percent  of  the 
population in 96 percent of the counties in the United States, and roughly 200 mil-
lion  calls  are  made  to  9-1-1  in  the  United  States  each  year.  CenturyTel  supports 
the  concept  advanced  by  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  that  a 
service or device should be subject to 9-1-1/E–911 regulation if the customers using 
such  service  or  device  have  a  ‘‘reasonable  expectation  of  access  to  9-1-1  and  E–911 
services.’’ Indeed, providing reliable and secure 9-1-1 and E–911 services has become 
a  necessary  cost  of  doing  business  for  all  voice  providers,  regardless  of  platform 
used. 

The  American  public’s  expectations  for  access  to  emergency  services  have  not  di-
minished,  but  admittedly  have  become  more  challenging  to  meet,  as  new  tech-
nologies for delivering voice communications have arisen and as consumers have be-
come  more  mobile.  The  wireless  industry  can  attest  to  the  challenges  in  imple-
menting  emergency  services  in  an  increasingly  mobile  environment.  No  doubt,  IP-
enabled  voice  communications  is  another  technology  that  will  present  challenges  in 
implementing  emergency  services  because  it  can  be  delivered  using  so  many  dif-
ferent platforms. However, the time is NOW to address the unique challenges VoIP 
presents  for  having  access  to  emergency  services.  Intrado,  a  national  provider  of  9-
1-1  database  management  services,  projects  a  nearly  tenfold  increase  in  expected 
VoIP  9-1-1  calls  from  2004  to  2006,  to  a  total  of  3.5  million  residential  VoIP  9-1-
1  calls  in  2006,  as  this  new  communication  technology  becomes  more  widespread. 
Unfortunately,  recent  incidents  in  Texas,  Florida  and  Connecticut  have  brought 
to  the  forefront  the  need  to  address  public  safety  issues  related  to  IP-enabled  voice 
communications. By now everyone has probably heard about the family in Houston, 
Texas  who  was  in  need  of  emergency  assistance  when  an  intruder  entered  their 
home  and  attempted  to  burglarize  the  family  at  gunpoint.  During  the  incident,  a 
9-1-1  call  using  an  interconnected  VoIP  service  was  unable  to  be  completed,  thus 
delaying  dispatch  of  an  ambulance  for  the  wounded  homeowners.  The  incidents  in 
Florida and Connecticut were just as traumatic and harrowing. 

We  applaud  Congress  for  introducing  S.  1063  (and  likewise  H.R.  2418  in  the 
House) and holding this field hearing in light of the reasons listed above. While the 
FCC  has  issued  an  Order  and  Notice  of  Proposed  Rulemaking  on  E–911  require-
ments  for  IP-enabled  service  providers,  we  are  glad  Congress  has  stepped  in  to  ad-
dress  those  issues  where  the  FCC  believes  it  lacks  jurisdiction—namely,  requiring 
incumbent  local  exchange  carriers  (ILECs)  to  give  VoIP  providers  access  to  emer-
gency  services  infrastructure  and  immunity  from  liability  for  providing  9-1-1  serv-
ices.  We  also  believe  S.  1063  provides  more  clarity  than  the  FCC’s  Order  on  some 
issues  crucial  to  owners  of  emergency  services  infrastructure  and  can  hopefully 
move  more  swiftly  towards  resolution  of  these  critical  issues.  I  will  discuss  S.  1063 
and those other crucial issues more fully in the remarks that follow. 
Appropriate Compensation for Access to Emergency Infrastructure 

S.  1063  contains  a  provision  that  requires  entities  with  ownership  or  control  of 
emergency  services  infrastructure  to  ‘‘provide  any  requesting  IP-enabled  voice  serv-
ice  provider  with  nondiscriminatory  access  to  their  equipment,  network,  databases, 
interfaces  and  any  other  related  capabilities  necessary  for  the  delivery  and  comple-
tion of 9-1-1 and E–911 calls and information related to such 9-1-1 or E–911 calls.’’ 
The  owner  ‘‘shall  provide  access  to  the  infrastructure  at  just  and  reasonable,  non-
discriminatory rates, terms and conditions.’’ CenturyTel is pleased S. 1063 address-
es  this  issue  and  believes  the  FCC’s  June  3,  2005  Order  does  not  fully  address  the 
issue of requiring VoIP providers to compensate owners of emergency services infra-
structure.  CenturyTel,  like  other  local  telephone  companies,  has  invested  in  net-
works capable of connecting our customers to life-saving services such as 9-1-1, and 
we  believe  that  providing  9-1-1  access  is  a  legitimate  cost  of  doing  business  for  all 
voice providers. 

CenturyTel  believes  that  creating  a  seamless  public  safety  and  reliability  stand-
ard for all voice service providers is the best public policy and VoIP providers should 
be held to the same public safety and reliability standards as other voice providers. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

35

To require less of a provider merely because a different technology is used to facili-
tate  the  voice  call  is  not  in  the  public’s  best  interest.  In  addition,  VoIP  providers 
should  properly  compensate  incumbent  carriers  for  access  to  their  9-1-1  infrastruc-
ture. ILECs should not have mandates to provide 9-1-1 and related services to VoIP 
providers for free. 

Today,  CenturyTel  either  owns  the  emergency  services  infrastructure  in  a  par-
ticular area or properly compensates other owners of emergency services infrastruc-
ture  in  areas  where  CenturyTel  is  not  itself  the  owner.  Generally,  a  telecommuni-
cations carrier can either access emergency services infrastructure under a tariff ar-
rangement  or  through  an  interconnection  agreement,  depending  on  the  require-
ments  in  each  specific  state.  Under  the  current  sections  251  and  271  requirements 
in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the VoIP provider either has to declare itself 
a ‘‘certificated’’ telecommunications carrier or negotiate access to emergency services 
infrastructure  through  a  third  party  competitive  LEC.  Facilities-based  providers 
must  have  assurances  that  VoIP  providers  have  a  requirement  to  adequately  com-
pensate those who make the necessary investment for access to emergency services 
infrastructure. Such compensation should be made at a level that adequately covers 
the actual costs of ownership of emergency services infrastructure. The tariff process 
provides sufficient protection for all providers involved in such an arrangement. 
Liability Concerns 

This  past  June,  CenturyTel  and  the  State  of  Montana  entered  into  a  contract 
under  which  CenturyTel  will  provide  9-1-1  services  throughout  the  entire  State  of 
Montana. During the negotiations for this contract, it became apparent that a major 
concern  for  all  stakeholders  throughout  the  emergency  services  industry  is  liability 
in the event something goes wrong in the process. While S. 1063 does contain a pro-
vision  that  gives  providers  of  IP-enabled  voice  service  immunity  or  other  protection 
from liability of a scope and extent that is not less than that given to any local ex-
change  company  under  applicable  Federal  and  State  law  (whether  through  statute, 
judicial  decision,  tariffs  filed  by  such  local  exchange  company,  or  otherwise), 
CenturyTel feels more inquiry and work needs to be done to develop this issue fur-
ther. 

Statutes providing immunity and limitations of liability for 9-1-1 service providers 
vary widely from state to state and in many cases do not really provide the liability 
protections that may be appropriate for telecommunications companies, Public Safe-
ty Answering Points (PSAPs), emergency services personnel, and local governments. 
CenturyTel believes Congress should develop a Federal statute that provides mean-
ingful limitation of liability provisions for all parties to add some consistency to the 
process  and  supplant  the  patchwork  of  state  statutes  currently  addressing  liability 
issues.  To  be  clear,  CenturyTel  proposes  a  Federal  statute  that  provides  immunity 
from liability for all parties who act without willful or wanton conduct in the execu-
tion and provision of a 9-1-1 call, similar to that codified in Oregon Revised Statutes 
§ 401.715 (2003), as follows:

‘‘No provider . . . or any other person that supplies 9-1-1 emergency reporting 
system  equipment  . . .  or  the  9-1-1  jurisdiction  . . .  shall  be  held  civilly  liable 
for the installation, performance, provision or maintenance of a 9-1-1 emergency 
reporting  system  or  enhanced  9-1-1  telephone  service  if  the  provider  . . .  sup-
plier  . . .  or  the  9-1-1  jurisdiction  . . .  act  without  willful  or  wanton  conduct.’’

Key Policy Decisions Facing Congress and the FCC 

Congress  should  affirm  that  those  using  the  network  must  pay  for  their  use. 
‘‘Phantom  traffic’’  and  other  payment  avoidance  schemes  really  are  just  theft,  plain 
and simple. Advanced communications networks are the foundation for realizing the 
promise  of  IP-enabled  services  and  without  investments  by  companies  like 
CenturyTel,  there  would  be  no  broadband  connection,  no  VoIP  and  ultimately  no 
services like switched digital video or telemedicine. 

Congress  should  support  the  21st  century  network  through  maintaining  the  Na-
tion’s  commitment  to  Universal  Service.  Congress  should  support  stability  in  uni-
versal  service  by  broadening  the  base  of  support  to  include  all  providers  of  voice 
service,  including  VoIP,  and  setting  high  standards  in  order  to  receive  universal 
service.  Also,  because  of  broadband’s  importance  to  the  future  of  advanced  services 
deployment,  consideration  should  be  given  to  providing  explicit  support  for 
broadband deployment. 

Congress  should  continue  to  address  social  and  public  safety  concerns  in  an  ever 
changing  technological  and  mobile  environment.  The  tragic  events  of  9/11  and  in 
Texas,  Connecticut  and  Florida  have  highlighted  the  sense  of  urgency  in  this  area. 
Congress can simply make clear that public safety responsibilities apply to all, and 
must be fulfilled as a necessary requirement for all providers. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

36

Congress should make clear that VoIP providers who are given nondiscriminatory 
access  to  emergency  services  infrastructure  must  pay  adequate  compensation  to 
local  telephone  companies  and  other  owners  of  such  infrastructure  in  an  amount 
that  adequately  covers  the  actual  costs  of  ownership  of  the  infrastructure.  9-1-1  is 
a legitimate cost of doing business for all voice providers and need not be borne en-
tirely by customers. Without such assurances, no one will voluntarily want to be an 
owner  of  this  emergency  services  infrastructure.  Therefore,  those  companies  that 
‘‘step up to the plate’’ should be protected for their commitment to public safety. 

Congress  should  develop  a  Federal  standard  that  addresses  limitation  of  liability 
issues  in  the  provision  of  E–911  services.  Today’s  patchwork  of  state  statutes  pre-
sents  significant  difficulties  for  stakeholders  who  seek  to  understand  their  rights, 
responsibilities and potential liabilities with regard to implementation and provision 
of  9-1-1  services.  A  national  program  like  9-1-1  that  requires  so  much  cooperation 
between all stakeholders across the country should not be subject to the politics and 
whims and desires of each state if it is to work as seamlessly as the American public 
desires. 
Conclusion 

Senator  Burns,  we  thank  you  for  holding  this  hearing.  I  think  everyone  under-
stands  the  importance  of  VoIP  and  E–911  to  the  Nation’s  economy  and  consumers 
and  can  appreciate  that  your  decisions  in  this  area  will  help  shape  the  future  of 
telecommunications  and  consumer  safety.  CenturyTel  is  eager  to  work  with  you  in 
the  future  and  hopes  that  you  will  seriously  consider  the  points  we  make  here 
today.  I  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  join  you  today  and  look  forward  to  your 
questions.

Senator  BURNS.  Thank  you  very  much.  A  question  arising  from 
that  also.  Now  we’ll  hear  from  Bill  Squires,  Blackfoot  Tele-
communications  Group,  and  he  follows  the  compliance  issues  very 
closely. Bill, thank you for coming today. 
STATEMENT  OF  WILLIAM  SQUIRES,  SR.  VICE  PRESIDENT  AND 
GENERAL  COUNSEL,  BLACKFOOT  TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
GROUP 
Mr.  SQUIRES.  Thank  you  very  much,  Senator.  My  testimony  has 
been  submitted,  so  I’ll  depart  actually  greatly  from  that,  because 
I  think  the  testimony  I’ve  submitted,  I  would  encourage  the  Com-
mittee to consider. 

But  it  addresses—much  like  the  rest  of  the  testimony—VoIP 
issues,  and  how  that  hits  our  rural  company.  I  talked  to  Monica 
this  morning,  and  she  also  asked  me  to  address  some  of  the  wire-
less compliance issues, so I’ll do my best to hit those. 

For  the  record,  my  name  is  Bill  Squires.  I’m  Senior  Vice  Presi-
dent  and  General  Counsel  for  Blackfoot  Telecommunications 
Group,  which  is  headquartered  in  Missoula.  On  behalf  of  our  com-
pany,  I  very  much  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  appear  at  this 
hearing today. 

Our  company  started  in  1954,  Senator,  and  its  mission  at  that 
time, and now, continues to be bringing the best in communications 
to  rural  Montana.  Part  of  that  mission  involves  the  safety  and  se-
curity  of  our  members  and  our  neighbors,  and  we  do  that  largely 
through E–911. 

The  critical  issues  that  you’ve  already  heard  about  from  other 
witnesses  here  today,  I’ll  just  reiterate  briefly  some  of  the  things 
that concern us as a rural provider in Montana. 

Jeremy  Ferkin  just  hit  on  compensation  issues.  Certainly  that’s 
an  issue  for  us.  We  don’t  have  objections  with  access  to  our  net-
work  for  VoIP  providers  in  order  to  enable  E–911  services;  but  as 
you’re  keenly  aware,  the  cost  of  providing  services  in  rural  Mon-
tana  is  extreme.  Certainly  we’re  greatly  dependent  on  Universal 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

37

Service  Funds  for  that;  and  as  Jeremy  Ferkin  stated,  the  people 
that  use  the  network  do  have  to  adequately  compensate  our  mem-
bers and our company for that kind of access. 

As  somewhat  of  a  side  note  to  that  same  issue,  Senator,  I  urge 
you  and  Members  of  the  Committee  to  reconcile  that  access  re-
quirement  in  Senate  Bill  1063  with  the  rural  exemptions  in  the 
1996  Telecom  Act.  As  you’re  aware,  there  are  some  provisions  in 
that  act  that  give  protection  to  rural  companies  to  opening  their 
network  and  their  network  elements  to  other  companies  in  order 
to protect the viability of rural telecommunications. We need to en-
sure  that  the  access  provisions  of  Senate  Bill  1063  do  not  negate 
those protections that were built into the 1996 Act. 

Certainly  the  liability  parity  issues,  I  think  that  we  certainly 
would and do support. Montana has a pretty good statute on liabil-
ity protection for telephone providers, traditional telephone compa-
nies,  when  it  comes  to  providing  E–911,  and  I  think  it  makes  per-
fect sense to extend that same protection to providers of VoIP serv-
ices. 

Certainly  the  biggest  problem  we’re  facing,  Senator,  in  the 
trenches  is  rural  addressing,  an  issue  I  know  you’re  familiar  with, 
but  it’s  one  that  continues  to  haunt  our  implementation  of  E–911, 
particularly certainly on the wireline side. 

In  my  own  county,  in  Missoula  County,  where  Qwest  is  the 
RBOC provider to Missoula, and we’re the independent provider to 
the communities surrounding Missoula, such as Seeley Lake, Clin-
ton,  etc.,  that  are  also  in  Missoula  County,  the  data  was  validated 
to a sufficient level from a population percentage standpoint to roll 
out  E–911  simply  by  validating  the  MSAG  for  the  Missoula  urban 
area,  if  we  can  call  it  that,  without  having  to  validate  rural  ad-
dressing for the rural areas. 

And  so  E–911  has  been  implemented  in  Missoula  County,  really 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  rural  areas,  and  that’s  something  that  has 
to  be  addressed,  I  think,  with  the  standards  that  you  have  heard 
from  other  witnesses  about.  The  counties  that  we  work  with  are 
very  good  about  cooperating  with  us,  but  the  fact  of  the  matter  is 
they’re  all  doing  their  own  thing,  and  we  do  need  some  standards 
to allow us to interact with counties on the same basis. 

Briefly, Senator, I’ll just touch on wireless issues in the interests 
of  full  disclosure.  We  continue  to  operate  a  wireless  business  in 
western  Montana,  but  we’ve  sold  it.  We’re  no  longer  the  owners  of 
the  wireless  business,  although  we’re  the  operators  currently.  I’m 
pleased  and  proud  to  report  to  you  today  that  that  system  is  fully 
compliant  with  the  provisions  of  wireless  E–911.  We’ve  met  all  of 
the standards to date, and we have no doubt that we’ll hit full com-
pliance under the current statute. 

And  I  would  be  happy  to  address  any  questions  you  may  have 
with  wireless  compliance  as  well.  Again,  thank  you  for  the  oppor-
tunity, Senator. 

[The prepared statement of Mr. Squires follows:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF WILLIAM SQUIRES, SR. VICE PRESIDENT AND GENERAL 

COUNSEL, BLACKFOOT TELECOMMUNICATIONS GROUP 

Introduction 

Senator Burns, my name is Bill Squires. I am the Sr. Vice President and General 
Counsel  for  the  Blackfoot  Telecommunications  Group  headquartered  in  Missoula, 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

38

Montana.  Blackfoot  is  both  an  incumbent  rural  telephone  company,  providing  serv-
ice  to  approximately  18,000  customer  access  lines  in  rural  western  Montana,  and 
a competitive local exchange carrier, providing competitive telecommunications serv-
ices to the Missoula market. 
Support for Senate Bill 1063

Since  1954  when  Blackfoot  began  service  as  a  small  rural  telephone  cooperative, 
it has done so in large part to provide our rural members with much needed contact 
with  others,  including  vital  access  to  emergency  services.  The  continuing  develop-
ment  of  our  global  economy,  and  the  absolute  need  for  Montana  to  be  a  player  in 
that economy, dictates that our telecommunications networks and services be on par 
with  those  in  much  larger  urban  areas—and  they  are.  However,  we  must  always 
have  as  our  first  goal  the  safety  and  security  of  our  families  and  our  neighbors.  To 
that  end,  we  applaud  the  introduction  of  Senate  Bill  1063,  and  very  much  appre-
ciate your co-sponsorship of this important legislation. 

There is a great deal of ‘‘buzz’’ surrounding the virtues of IP-Enabled Voice Serv-
ices, or ‘‘VoIP’’ as it has been dubbed. To be sure, this technology represents signifi-
cant advances in not only network utilization and efficiency, but in customer choice 
flexibility.  With  that  flexibility  comes  the  heightened  obligation  to  ensure,  to  the 
greatest  extent  possible,  that  all  our  customers,  including  those  in  our  rural  areas, 
will have the benefits of Enhanced–911 services should they ever be needed. Senate 
Bill 1063 takes many important steps in ensuring that E–911 services will be avail-
able to VoIP customers. 
Implementation Realities 

Senate  Bill  1063  delegates  to  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  the  au-
thority  to  prescribe  regulations  in  order  to  establish  a  set  of  requirements  on  pro-
viders of IP-Enabled Voice Services. Section 2(b) of the bill would require companies 
such  as  Blackfoot  to  provide  non-discriminatory  access  to  emergency  services  infra-
structure.  While  Blackfoot  certainly  does  not  object  to  this  requirement,  I  implore 
you  to  be  as  specific  as  possible  in  the  Congressional  Record  regarding  just  what 
is  meant  by  such  ‘‘nondiscriminatory’’  access,  as  well  as  the  cost  recovery  mecha-
nisms  for  such  infrastructure.  With  a  limited  customer  base,  Blackfoot  and  similar 
companies  simply  cannot  absorb  a  great  deal  of  additional  expense  relating  to  up-
dates  to  master  databases  of  location  information.  This  process  can  be  complicated 
by  the  dynamic  nature  of  IP  devices,  meaning  that  location  databases  may  need  to 
essentially  have  immediate  updates  whenever  a  user  of  this  service  changes  loca-
tion. I would suggest that, similar to wireless E–911, a simpler and more cost effec-
tive  implementation  regime  may  be  to  require,  over  time,  that  all  VoIP  devices  be 
GPS-equipped. 

Any  non-discriminatory  system  will  undoubtedly  involve  updating  of  customer 
support software. Again, the Commission’s rules should provide for the fair recovery 
of these costs. 

As  an  aside,  and  somewhat  out  of  the  scope  of  this  hearing,  I  also  encourage  the 
Committee,  and  the  Commission,  to  reconcile  the  bill’s  ‘‘non-discriminatory  access’’ 
provisions  with  the  overriding  provisions  of  Section  251(f)  of  the  Telecommuni-
cations  Act  of  1996,  which  exempts  rural  telephone  companies  such  as  Blackfoot 
Telephone  Cooperative  from  certain  ‘‘unbundling’’  requirements  otherwise  imposed 
by that Act. 

Finally,  I  would  be  remiss  if  I  did  not  comment  on  the  biggest  obstacle  to  date 
in implementing E–911 in rural service areas, and that is the issue of rural address-
ing and county-state collaboration. Regarding addressing, some counties in Montana 
have  contracted  with  third-parties  to  do  rural  addressing,  and  it  is  working  very 
well.  However,  some  counties  have  chosen  to  undertake  the  addressing  themselves. 
This  has  led  to  delays  in  completing  rural  addressing  in  a  timely  manner.  In  Mis-
soula  County,  for  instance,  E–911  has  been  implemented  without  completion  of  ad-
dressing in many of the rural areas served by Blackfoot. 

Compounding  this  issue  is  the  lack  of  mandated  standards  for  addressing.  While 
the  state  has  set  forth  recommended  standards,  each  county  is  free  to  implement 
addressing in their own way. It may sound tedious, but designations such as ‘‘Lane’’, 
‘‘In’’,  or  ‘‘Ine’’  have  significant  database  implications.  Similarly,  inconsistencies  in 
databases maintained by some E–911 providers cause a great deal of delay, and ex-
pense,  in  scrubbing  data.  Future  funding  and  implementation  regulations  can  be 
used by the Commission to entice more counties to move toward standards, and for 
providers to pay greater attention to clean data. 
Conclusion 

Again,  on  behalf  of  Blackfoot  Telecommunications  and  similar  rural  telephone 
companies, I would like to thank you for bringing forward this important legislation. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

39

As  with  any  legislation,  the  devil  certainly  is  in  the  implementation  details,  and  I 
commit  to  work  with  you,  your  staff,  the  Commission,  and  other  interested  parties 
to  see  that  this  legislation  brings  to  rural  Montana  the  benefits  of  E–911  services, 
while allowing us all to realize the opportunities brought by VoIP services.

Senator  BURNS.  Thank  you,  Mr.  Squires.  I  appreciate  that  very 
much.  Mr.  Greg  Jergeson,  Public  Service  Commission  of  Montana. 
Welcome. 

STATEMENT OF GREG JERGESON, CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC 

SERVICE COMMISSION OF MONTANA 

Mr. JERGESON. Thank you, Senator Burns, for having invited me 

to appear before your Committee today. 

I want to express my appreciation that you’re holding this impor-
tant  hearing  in  Montana,  the  state  that  you  and  I  both  represent 
as public servants, and it’s a special honor, frankly, for me that you 
choose to have this hearing in Cascade County, which turns out to 
be a cornerstone community of my own Public Service Commission 
District No. 1, which runs from here north to the Canadian border, 
and  east  to  North  Dakota;  and  if  there’s  a  definition  of  rural,  that 
probably  is  PSC  District  1.  So  I  appreciate  you  bringing  this  hear-
ing here today. 

One of the first things I learned back in 1975 when I entered the 
Montana  Senate  as  a  fresh  faced,  really  gung-ho  kind  of  guy,  was 
some  of  the  older  hands  said,  ‘‘The  first  bit  of  advice  is  don’t  fili-
buster  your  own  bills  to  death;’’  and  though  this  is  not  my  bill,  I 
do support it, and I don’t wish to filibuster your bill to death, Sen-
ator. So I’m going to keep my remarks fairly short. 

We’ve  submitted  written  testimony.  I’ll  just  kind  of  paraphrase 
some of the items in the written testimony, and then be happy, like 
the others, to answer any questions you may have. 

Clearly  Montana  citizens  expect  that  when  they  dial  9-1-1,  that 
that  will  get  them  the  service  that  they  need  in  whatever  emer-
gency  situation  they’re  experiencing,  irrespective  of  who  their 
telecom  or  communications  provider  is,  be  it  wireline,  wireless,  or 
VoIP; and the Montana PSC believes that this bill is important, in 
that it is designed to make sure that that accepted universal serv-
ice by almost everybody in the public is observed. 

The  other  thing  important  about  it,  we  find  that  sometimes  on 
the  Montana  PSC,  we  think  that  we  have  authority  to  do  certain 
things,  but  we  get  a  certain  comfort  level  by  going  to  our  Legisla-
ture  and  saying,  ‘‘We  would  like  to  have  that  authority  expressly 
put into the statutes,’’ and I think much of your bill does that very 
same  thing  with  respect  to  the  FCC  ruling  that  came  out  on  this 
particular subject, is that it will clearly clarify that in fact the FCC 
had that authority. 

From  my  perspective  as  Chairman  of  the  State  Public  Service 
Commission,  we  appreciate  the  provisions  in  your  bill,  particularly 
Section  2(h),  which  permits  the  FCC  to  delegate  to  the  state  com-
missions implementation and enforcement of the national rules. We 
appreciate  Section  2(c)  that  clarifies  that  nothing  in  these  Federal 
laws or rules will prevent the collection of fees on a non-discrimina-
tory  basis  from  the  providers,  provided  that  that  revenue  is  dedi-
cated to the 9-1-1 purposes. 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6601 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

40

I’ve  attached  to  my  testimony  a  resolution  passed  by  the  Na-
tional  Association  of  Regulatory  Utility  Commissioners  at  their 
summer  meeting  in  Austin,  Texas  this  summer  in  support  of  the 
provisions  of  this  bill,  and  believe  that  that  gives  clearly  a  nation-
wide feel to the support for this fine bill. 

As a final observation, I would note that this bill and its require-
ments that all service providers share in the delivery of this essen-
tial universal service demonstrates that the distinction some would 
make  between  information  services  and  telecommunications  serv-
ices is in fact a distinction without a difference. And I support this 
bill,  and  I  can  think  of  no  reason  why  it  shouldn’t  pass  without 
delay.  I  commend  you  for  your  sponsoring  this  bill,  and  your  co-
sponsors  as  well,  and  I  thank  you  for  this  opportunity  to  testify. 

[The prepared statement of Mr. Jergeson follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF GREG JERGESON, CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 

OF MONTANA 

Montana citizens who dial 9-1-1 expect to be connected to emergency services per-
sonnel.  This  expectation  exists  no  matter  what  kind  of  telephone  service  they  are 
using—wireline,  wireless  or  the  newest  telecom  technology,  broadband/VoIP.  This 
bill goes hand in hand with, and strengthens, the recent FCC action to require VoIP 
companies  to  provide  their  customers  with  the  same  E–911  calling  capability  that 
other telephone companies provide. 

It  is  essential  to  public  safety  that  VoIP  providers  be  required  to  make  this  vital 
emergency  service  available  to  all  of  their  customers  without  delay.  This  bill  does 
that, and more. It also recognizes that traditional phone companies own the existing 
E–911 infrastructure and mandates that those companies give VoIP providers access 
to  their  9-1-1  networks  on  a  nondiscriminatory  basis  and  at  reasonable  rates.  And, 
just in case there is any ambiguity in current law about the FCC’s authority to act 
on VoIP E–911, this bill explicitly provides the FCC with that authority. 

From  my  perspective  as  chairman  of  a  state  public  service  commission,  it  is  im-
portant  to  retain  the  provisions  in  the  bill  that  recognize  the  role  of  states  in  the 
provision of E–911 emergency services. In particular, Section 2(h) of the bill, which 
permits  the  FCC  to  delegate  implementation  and  enforcement  of  the  national  9-1-
1 rules to state commissions, should be retained. State commissions are the agencies 
best situated to implement and enforce national 9-1-1 standards concerning the tele-
communications providers operating in their states. 

In addition, Section 2(c) clarifies that nothing in the bill or in Federal law or rules 
prevents  states  from  collecting  9-1-1  fees  from  VoIP  phone  companies,  in  the  same 
way fees are collected from other phone companies, if none of the collected revenue 
is diverted for non-9-1-1 purposes. This, too, is an important feature of this bill. Cer-
tainly  the  state  of  Montana  should  be  able  to  require  VoIP  companies  to  share  the 
same responsibility for supporting Montana’s 9-1-1 program as other types of phone 
companies currently do. 

I note for the record that the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commis-
sioners, which includes the Montana PSC, adopted a resolution at its summer meet-
ing  that  commended  you  for  introducing  this  legislation  and  stated  the  organiza-
tion’s  commitment  to  working  with  Congress,  the  FCC  and  the  industry  on  this 
issue.  I’ve  attached  a  copy  of  the  NARUC  resolution  to  my  testimony.  NARUC  is 
particularly  interested  in  preserving  the  productive  state  commission  role  in  arbi-
trating  and  enforcing  interconnection  to  9-1-1  and  E–911  trunk  lines  and  hopes  to 
clarify that role as this bill moves forward. 

As final observation, I would note that this bill and its requirements that all serv-
ice  providers  share  in  the  delivery  of  this  essential  universal  service  demonstrates 
that  the  distinction  some  would  make  between  information  services  and  tele-
communications services is, in fact, a distinction without a difference. 

I support this bill and can think of no reason why it shouldn’t be enacted without 
delay  by  Congress.  I  commend  Senator  Burns  for  sponsoring  it  as  well  as  for  his 
continuing  support  of  Montana’s  E–911  program.  Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to 
testify.

Senator BURNS. Thank you. Commissioner Jergeson, can you an-
swer  a  question?  Nine  times  out  of  ten,  we  start  going  down  the 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

41

road  of  legislation,  and  we  wrestle  with  definitions.  Are  we  going 
to have to change some of the definitions between, say, communica-
tions and information services? 

Mr. JERGESON. Well, I think maybe we need to review what kind 
of  definitions  the  various  parties  are  trying  to  put  to  those  kinds 
of  services,  and  beware  that  they  may  be  making  distinctions  that 
serve  their  purposes,  and  that  we  may  need  to  make  sure  that  we 
have a definition that meets the old adage about the nature of the 
duck, how it walks and quacks. 

Senator  BURNS.  That’s  a  good  answer.  Mr.  Squires,  would  you 
like to comment on that? Because we don’t always define the same 
things  the  same  way,  and  whenever  we  start  down  this,  I  just 
think  if  we  define  them  right  off  the  bat,  then  it  makes  our  job  a 
lot easier. 

Mr.  SQUIRES.  It  would,  Senator.  I  agree  with  that.  As  I  was  lis-
tening  to  the  question  and  Chairman  Jergeson’s  response,  I  was 
thinking of the duck adage. You beat me to it. 

You  heard  testimony  from  someone—and  I  apologize.  I  can’t  re-
member which one it was—on the panel right before us that essen-
tially if it’s a voice call, then it’s a telecommunications service. And 
I would absolutely agree with that. 

If  it’s  a  two-way  voice  call,  where  I’m  picking  up  my  phone,  and 
calling  your  office,  even  though  that  is  carried  over  IP  protocol, 
that’s a telecommunications service; and if there are advantages to 
be  gained  in  the  market—be  they  regulatory  advantages,  or  other 
competitive  advantages—by  trying  to  shoehorn  something  into  an 
information services definition, I think companies will do that, and 
I  don’t  think  there’s  necessarily  anything  wrong  with  that.  That 
gives them a competitive advantage. 

That’s  why  I  do  think  it’s  important  that  legislation  and  regu-
latory  rules  clarify  just  what  is  a  telecommunications  service,  and 
in my mind, it’s just pretty simple. It’s a two-way conversation. 

Senator BURNS. Same, Jeremy? 
Mr.  FERKIN.  The  only  thing  I  would  add  to  it  is,  since  we’re  on 
adages, follow the money. Why are people creating a differentiation 
between  an  information  service  and  a  telecommunications  service? 
And  in  most  cases,  it’s  to  get  around  paying  for  whomever’s  net-
work  you’re  using.  There  is  no  IP  without  CenturyTel  and  compa-
nies  like  Blackfoot  building  the  broadband  infrastructure  out  to 
your home, your ranch, or wherever it may be. 

So  Vonage  could  not  exist  without  our  infrastructure.  And  if 
they’re  utilizing  our  infrastructure,  and  the  voice  communications 
over it that are being used in such a manner that it takes revenue 
away  from  us,  so  we  then  are  more  dependent  on  things  like  USF 
for other things. Then if it quacks like a duck, it walks like a duck, 
it’s a duck. The reality is. Voice is voice. 

Senator  BURNS.  Let’s  talk  about  mapping  and  addressing.  That 
seems  to  be  a  concern.  Why  is  it  so  difficult  that  we  can’t  get  cor-
rect  mapping  for  locations  for  our  different  emergency  centers? 
What’s the problem that we run into in mapping? 

Mr. SQUIRES. Senator, the problem that quite simply we run into 
in our area is resources. It’s expensive. Typically counties will hire 
consultants,  or  can  hire  consultants—there  are  several  companies 
out  there  that  do  this—to  essentially  go  around  and  GPS  every 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

42

farmhouse, every home, every business out in our service area. It’s 
expensive. 

So resources, I think, are the number one issue. I think counties 
are  doing  the  best  they  can,  but  they  don’t  have  the  human  re-
sources  or  the  financial  resources  to  complete  the  job.  And  to  the 
extent  that  Congress  can  help  them  with  those  resources,  I  think 
that  would  go  a  great,  great  way  towards  getting  rural  addressing 
and rural mapping done. 

The other issue, of course, is that people hate to change their ad-
dress.  We  have  to  change  our  address  in  Granite  County,  at 
Georgetown  Lake,  because  we’re  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road. 
We have to be an odd number, not an even number. And that’s fine 
for  a  cabin,  but  a  business  hates  to  change  their  address.  And  so 
from that standpoint, there’s certainly some customer reluctance to 
do  it,  but  the  main  problem  is  resources.  The  counties  need  the 
money to get it done. 

Senator BURNS. When you go Voice Over IP, addressing becomes 
even more important, because when you move your computer, that 
is  not  noted  whenever  they  call  it  in  that  he’s  moved  to  another 
city,  even  though  it  may  be  in  the  same  area  that  the  telephone 
company or whoever serves. Is that a problem, and should some re-
sponsibility be incumbent on the computer user or the person using 
the Voice Over IP services? 

Mr.  SQUIRES.  Certainly  I  think  it  should  be,  Senator.  I  think 
there  are  some  personal  responsibilities  that  people  have  to  take. 
And  mobility  in  our  society  causes  an  increase,  I  think,  of  some  of 
that responsibility. 

Some of our technical folks think that we should get to the point 
where we track VoIP devices just like we do cell phones, use GPS. 
That’s  several  years  down  the  road,  and  right  now  there’s  the  ex-
pense,  and  there’s  privacy  issues  certainly  that  go  with  that.  But 
that can go a long ways towards taking care of that mobility prob-
lem. 

Senator BURNS. Mr. Jergeson. 
Mr.  JERGESON.  Well,  I  think  that  it’s  extremely  important  that 
somehow that person is located, and the technology probably exists 
to  accomplish  that.  But  the  other  thing  that  is  important,  I  think, 
in  this  whole  realm  or  whether  or  not  we  have  effective  9-1-1  is 
whether or not the various technologies have coverage. I think the 
cell phones in so many areas of the state being dead spots in Mon-
tana.  Your  cell  phone  might  be  able  to  tell  somebody  where  you’re 
at, but if you’re not in a place where you can get a signal, you can’t 
complete the call to begin with. 

Therefore, I think that’s a major consideration as we work on im-
proving  and  fixing  our  9-1-1  systems,  is  that  part  of  that  needs  to 
be  able  to  make  the  coverage  of  these  various  technologies  avail-
able almost everywhere. 

Senator BURNS. Jeremy. 
Mr.  FERKIN.  Most  of  the—as  you  mentioned  earlier—the  dark 
suited  people  are  carrying  devices  similar  to  this,  Blackberries  or 
whatever  they  may  be.  So  I  think  our  laptops  and  our  concerns 
about  the  mobile  computer  are  going  to  be  a  temporal  issue.  We 
have On Star in most of our vehicles. Commission Jergeson speaks 
perfectly about the fact that we still have issues where there aren’t 

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

43

cell coverage areas in Montana. So regardless of whether you won’t 
be  able  to  get  VoIP,  you  won’t  be  able  to  get  cell  coverage  issue, 
but more and more people are going to a highly mobile device. 

By the way, this has a GPS chip in it, so you don’t have to think 
about  that.  So  I  think  we  have  a  time  period  here  where  laptops 
are  going  to  continue  to  be  of  use,  but  Federal  statutes  could  step 
in  and  say  GPS  devices  need  to  be  in  them  if  you’re  going  to  pro-
vide  VoIP.  But  the  other  side  is  technology  protocols—not  that  it 
will  mean  anything  to  a  lot  of  people  in  the  room—but  things  like 
MPLS,  we’re  doing  Multi  Protocol  Label  Switching,  it’s  amazing 
how when you’re sitting somewhere remote, your email still gets to 
you, right? We can put in the addressing packet of that data where 
you are. 

So yes, it would be a requirement of that person, when they reg-
ister  their  computer,  like  if  it  was  a  brand  new  Dell,  to  who  they 
are, where they’re at; then when they go to a new location, to have 
a  pop-up  that  says,  ‘‘We  see  that  you’re  not  coming  from  same  IP 
address,’’ or ‘‘You’re not coming from the same location. You’re hit-
ting new routers,’’ and it gives you a pop-up requirement. 

Service providers can require that. Service providers can demand 
that. So the technology isn’t the issue—we heard that from Mr. Cit-
ron  and  other  people—the  issue  is  how  do  we  make  it  happen? 
You’ve got to force it, and you’ve got to demand it. 

So  those  tragedies  that  have  happened  in  multiple  states  aren’t 
a result of technology, they’re a result of people being unwilling to 
work  together,  and  Federal  statute  demanding  that  they  work  to-
gether. 

Senator  BURNS.  Mr.  Jergeson,  are  you  pretty  happy  with  the 
build-out  and  the  progress  that’s  being  made  in  the  wireless  com-
munications in this state? 

Mr. JERGESON. No, I wouldn’t say that I’m particularly happy so 
far. There’s been a lot of build-out. But when you think of my PSC 
district,  you  can  drive  a  lot  of  miles  between  Grassrange  and  Cir-
cle, and not have cell phone service; and just because it’s a sparsely 
populated  area  doesn’t  mean  that  people  there  who  are  concerned 
about  the  ability  to  communicate,  particularly  in  emergencies  or 
family matters, not having coverage, they ought to be able to have 
coverage. 

We’re working very hard, and some of the providers are working 
very hard, and the approval of ETC status for Midrivers Telephone 
is—their  wireless  company  is  probably  going  to  help  a  great  deal 
in the build-out of that service, and as we work through those with 
other  providers  around  the  state.  But  the  process  is  slower  than  I 
like it at this point. 

Senator  BURNS.  We’ve  kind  of  identified  some  of  the  problems, 
and there are some of the problems that we can work on in the leg-
islation  and  some  of  them  that  we  can’t,  the  application,  and  on 
how we force this new service out into rural areas, and do a really 
good  job  in  emergencies  such  as  these.  I’m  a  very  strong  believer 
in  9-1-1.  I’ve  seen  it  save  lives,  but  we  also  hear  some  horror  sto-
ries whenever we start talking about locating people. 

Here  in  Montana,  there  was  one  instance  in  Petroleum  County, 
of  all  counties.  We  get  a  9-1-1  call.  It  did  go  to  the  closest  re-

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

44

sponder, which was Lewistown, and they couldn’t find him, and we 
lost a life just because of that. 

So that’s what we’re trying to prevent in this piece of legislation. 
We’ve  identified  some  of  the  areas,  and  I  look  forward  to  working 
with all of you to get this legislation passed, but also implemented. 
I think it takes all of us working together to implementation. 

The  mapping  concerns  me,  the  addressing  concerns  me,  because 
that’s  very  important,  especially  where  you  have  communities—
Let’s go to the Flathead over here in your part of the country, Mr. 
Squires,  where  you  have  growth,  Missoula  experiencing  great 
growth, new areas coming up. How do we stay ahead of that? And 
the  old  folks  that  have  always  had  the  same  old  address,  they’re 
not going to change. 

Also  our  Blackberries.  I  changed  the  name  of  my  Blackberry  to 
Dr.  Pepper.  In  order  to  manage  my  life,  I  only  turn  it  on  at  ten, 
two, and four, and then I turn it off. But nonetheless, we are living 
in  the  age  of  instant  communications.  And  so  I’m  under  the  as-
sumption  that  human  nature  being  as  it  is,  if  you  don’t  really  re-
spond  to  a  problem  right  away,  well,  in  two  hours  they’ve  already 
solved  it,  and  they  didn’t  need  you  anyway.  But  sometimes  that  is 
not  always  the  case.  But  I  know  that  people  don’t  like  to  change 
addresses,  and  they’re  just  reluctant  to  change,  but  they’re  going 
to have to. And most of them will. But we still have human nature 
as it is. 

Thank  you  for  your  testimony  today.  I’m  going  to  leave  the 
record open for other Senators. If they have questions, you may get 
written  questions  from  this  hearing.  If  you  would  respond  both  to 
the  Committee  and  the  individual  member  of  the  Committee,  I 
would  appreciate  that.  And  of  course,  all  your  statements  will  be 
made  a  part  of  the  record.  I  thank  you  for  coming  today.  It’s  been 
very  informative  to  me.  We’ve  still  got  a  little  work  to  do.  I  think 
working  together  we  can  get  it  done.  Thank  you  very  much.  We’re 
adjourned. 

[Whereupon, at 2:53 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

Æ

VerDate 0ct 09 2002  13:35 Nov 30, 2006 Jkt 030555 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6611 S:\WPSHR\GPO\DOCS\30555.TXT JACKF PsN: JACKF

